CHAPTER 4 MOMENTUM
I’d like to introduce you to a very good friend of mine.This friend, also close to Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, RichardBranson, Michael Jordon, Lance Armstrong, Michael Phelps,and every other superachiever, will impact your life like noother. I’d like to introduce you to Mo, or “Big Mo,” as I liketo call it. Big Mo is, without doubt, one of the most powerfuland enigmatic forces of success. You can’t see or feel Mo,but you know when you’ve got it. You can’t count on Moshowing up to every occasion, but when it does—WOW! BigMo can catapult you into the stratosphere of success. Andonce you’ve got Mo on your side, there’s almost no wayanyone can catch you.I’m excited about this chapter. When you implement the ideasoutlined ahead, your payoff will be a thousand times (or more)what you paid for this book. Seriously, these ideas are BIG!Chapter_4.indd   93Chapter_4.indd   934/21/10   1:02:06 PMIf you remember your high-school physics class (you do, don’t 
you?), you’ll recall Newton’s First Law, also known as theLaw ofInertia: Objects at rest tend to stay at rest unless acted on by an outsideforce. Objects in motion tend to stay in motion, unless something stopstheir momentum. Put another way, couch potatoes tend to stay couchpotatoes. Achievers—people who get into a successful rhythm—continue busting their butts and end up achieving more and more.It’s not easy to build momentum, but once you do, look out!Do you remember playing on merry-go-rounds when you were akid? A bunch of your friends piled on, weighing the thing downand then chanted as you worked to get the thing moving. Gettingrst step was always the hardest—getting it to move from a standstill. You had to push and pull,grimace and groan and throw your entire your body into theeffort. One step, two steps, three steps—it seemed like you weregetting nowhere. After a long and hard ef nally you were ableto get up a little bit of speed and run along side it. Even thoughyou were moving (and your friends were cheering louder), toget the speed you really wanted, you had to keep running fasterand faster, pulling it behind you as you ran with all your might.Finally, success! You jumped on and joined your friends in the joyof feeling the wind in your face and watching the outside worldturn into a smear of colors. After a while, when the merry-go-round started to slow down, you’d hop off and run alongside fora minute to get the speed back up—or you could simply give it acouple good pushes and then hop back on. Once the merry-go-round was spinning at a good clip, momentum took over, makingit easy to keep it going.Chapter_4.indd   94Chapter_4.indd   944/21/10   1:02:09 PM4/21/10   1:02:09 PM95MOMENTUMAdopting any change is the same way. You get started bytaking one small step, one action at a time. Progress is slow, butonce a newly formed habit has kicked in, Big Mo joins the party.Your success and results compound rapidly. See Figure 8.Fig. 8The same thing happens when a rocket ship launches. The spaceshuttle uses mor  ightthan it does the rest of the entire trip. Why? Because it has to breakfree from the pull of gravity. Once it does, it can glide in orbit. Thehard part? Getting off the ground. Your old ways and your oldconditioning are just like the inertia of the merry-go-round or theIt takes time and energy to get Big Mo, but with it, success andresults compound rapidly.Chapter_4.indd   95Chapter_4.indd   954/22/10   5:12:27 PM
a lot of energy to break your inertia and get your new enterpriseunder way. But once you get momentum, you will be hard tostop—virtually unbeatable—even though you’re now putting outconsiderably less effort while receiving greater results.Ever wonder why successful people tend to get moresuccessful… the rich get richer… the happy get happier… thelucky get luckier? They’ve got Mo. When it rains, it pours.But momentum works on both sides of the equation—it canwork for you or against you. Since the Compound Effect isalways working, negative habits, when left unchecked, can build upsteam and send you into a tailspin of “unlucky” circumstancesand consequences. That’s what our friend Brad from Chapter 1experienced. He gained thirty-three pounds with a few small badhabits, and experienced major job and marriage stress because ofthe negative momentum those habits generated. The law of inertiasays objects at rest tend to stay at rest—that’s the CompoundEffect workingagainst you. The more time you spend sitting onthat couch watching Two and a Half Men, the harder it will be foryou to get up and get moving. So let’s start RIGHT NOW!How do you get Big Mo to pay you a visit? You build up to it.You get into the groove, the “zone,” by doing the things we’vecovered so far:1) Making new choices based on your goals and core values2)  Putting those choices to work through newpositive behaviors 3)  Repeating those healthy actions long enough to establishnew habits Chapter_4.indd   96Chapter_4.indd   964/21/10   1:02:16 PM4/21/10   1:02:16 PM97MOMENTUM4) Building routines and rhythms into your daily disciplines5) Staying consistent over a long enough period of timeThen, BANG! Big Mo kicks in your door (that’s a good thing)! And you’re virtually unstoppable.Think about swimmer Michael Phelps, who won a legendaryeight gold medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. Howdid he do it? Working with his coach, Bob Bowman, Phelps honedhis talents over the course of twelve years. Together, they builtroutines and rhythms, and developed a consistency of performancethat prepared Phelps to catch momentum just at the right time—theOlympic Games. Phelps and Bowman’s symbiotic relationship islegendary for its scope and ambition—and its utter predictability.Bowman required such consistency when it came to practice thatone of Phelps’ most vivid memories is when Bowman allowednish a training session15 minutes early so he could getready for a middle-school dance! That’s one time in twelve years!No wonder Phelps was so unbeatable in the pool!Chances are you have an iPod. Ever think about the evolutionthat made it possible for that little gizmo to wind up in your pocket?Apple was around a long time before they launched the iPod. WhileMac computers have always had an intensely loyal following, theystill comprise a small fraction of the overall PC market. The iPodrst MP3 player out there; Apple was actuallylate to the game. But they had something powerful going for them:the consistency of their efforts in maintaining customer loyalty, asteadfast commitment to high quality, innovative design, and easeof use. They made the MP3 player simple, cool, easy to use andplay with, and promoted it through entertaining and inventive adcampaigns. It worked! It hit a nerve.Chapter_4.indd   97Chapter_4.indd   974/21/10   1:02:19 PM
growth the year previous to -33 percent. The following year,2002, was also a negative revenue growth year at -2 percent. But2003 saw a shift to a positive 18 percent. Growth came again in2004, up to 33 percent. And in 2005, they caught Mo, and BANG!Apple catapulted to 68 percent revenue growth and now holdsmore than 70 percent of the MP3 player market share. As youknow, Big Mo has since helped them dominate the smartphonemarket (with the iPhone) and digital music distribution withiTunes. This momentum has also given them a resurgence ofgrowth in their original market of personal computers. With BigMo on their side, I wouldn’t be surprised to see them expandinto other markets. Google was a small, struggling search engine for a while;today it, too, owns more than 60 percent of its market. YouTube,the video-sharing space created in February 2005, of ciallylaunched in November of that year. But it wasn’t until theyfeatured the “Lazy Sunday” digital short that originally airedon Saturday Night Live that people started going to YouTube innd it. That YouTube video clip went viral—it got more than 5 million views before NBC asked to have ittaken down. Then, there was no way to catch them—they hadMo. Today YouTube owns more than 60 percent of the videomarket! Google caught up with You Tube’s two young foundersand paid them $1.65 billion to buy their Mo. Wow!What do Michael Phelps, Apple, Google, and YouTube havein common? They were doing the same things before and afterthey achieved momentum. Their habits, disciplines, routines, andChapter_4.indd   98Chapter_4.indd   984/21/10   1:02:22 PM4/21/10   1:02:22 PM99MOMENTUMconsistency were the keys that unlocked momentum for each. Andthey became unstoppable when Big Mo showed up to their party.Routine PowerSome of our best intentions fail because we don’t have a system of execution. When it comes down to it, your new attitudes andbehaviors must be incorporated into your monthly, weekly, anddaily routines to affect any real, positive change. A routine issomething you do every day without fail, so that eventually, likebrushing your teeth or putting on your seatbelt, you do it withoutconscious thought. Similar to our discussion in the Habits section,if you look at anything you do that’s successful, you’ll see thatyou’ve probably developed a routine for it. These routines easelife’s stresses by making our actions automatic and effective. Toreach new goals and develop new habits, it’s necessary to createnew routines to support your objectives.The greater the challenge, the more rigorous our routines needto be. Ever wonder why military boot camp is so hard—whererelatively minor tasks like making the bed, shining your shoes, orstanding at attention become over-the-top important? Buildingroutines to prep soldiers for combat is the most effective wayto elicit ef cient, productive, and reliable performance underintense pressure. The seemingly simplistic routines built anddeveloped during basic training are so exact that soft, fearful,slovenly teenagers ar dent, mission-driven soldiers in only eight to twelve weeks. Their routines areso well-rehearsed that these young soldiers can instinctively actwith precision in the middle of the chaos of combat. That intenseChapter_4.indd   99Chapter_4.indd   994/21/10   1:02:25 PM
duties—even under the threat of imminent death.Now, your days might not be as dangerous, but without theproper routines built into your schedule, the results of your lifecan be unruly and unnecessarily hard. Developing a routine ofpredictable, daily disciplines prepares you to be victorious oneld of life.Golfer Jack Nicklaus was famous for his pre-shot routine. He wasreligious about the “dance” he would do before every shot, a seriesof routine mental and physical steps that got him fully focused andready for the shot. Jack would start out behind the ball, and thenpick out one or two intermediate spots between the ball and thetarget. As he walked around and appr rst thinghe would do is line up his clubface to his intermediate target. Hewouldn’t put his feet into position until he felt he had his clubfaceproperly squared up. Then he would take his stance. From there, hewould waggle the club and look out to his target, then back to hisintermediate target and back to the golf club, with a repeat of theview. Then, and only then, would he strike the ball.During one of the important Majors, a psychologist timed Nicklaus from the moment he pulled the club out of the baguntil the moment he hit the ball, and guess what? In each shot,fr rst tee to the eighteenth green, the timing of Jack’sroutine supposedlynever varied more thanone second. That is amazing! The same psychologist measured Greg Norman duringhis unfortunate collapse at the 1996 Masters. Lo and behold, hispre-shot routine got faster and faster as the round progressed.Varying his routine stunted his rhythm and consistency; he wasnever able to catch momentum. The moment Norman changed Chapter_4.indd   100Chapter_4.indd   1004/21/10   1:02:28 PM4/21/10   1:02:28 PM101MOMENTUMhis routine, his performance became unpredictable and hisresults erratic.Football kickers likewise cherish their pre-kick routines, whichallow them to get into sync with the thousands of times they havedone this same action. Predictably, without a pre-kick routine,their performance under time pressure greatly diminishes. Pilotsgo through their pr ight checklist. Even when a pilot has loggedthousands of hours and the plane just came in with a “perfect”performance review from a previous destination, the pilot goesthrough a pr ight checklist every time without fail. This notonly prepares the plane, but, more important, centers the pilotand prepares him for the upcoming performance.Of all the high-achievers and business owners I’ve worked with, I’ve seen that, along with good habits, each has developedroutines for accomplishing necessary daily disciplines. It’s theonly way any of us can predictably regulate our behavior. Theresimply isn’t any way around it. A daily routine built on goodhabits and disciplines separates the most successful among usfrom everyone else. A routine is exceptionally powerful.To create pr table and effective r rstdecide what behaviors and habits you want to implement. Takea moment to review your goals from Chapter 3, as well as thebehaviors you want to add and subtract. Now it’s your turn togure out your best pre-shot routine. Beintentional about what components belong. Once you establish,say, a morning routine, I want you to consider it cast in concreteuntil further notice. You get up. You do it—no argument. Ifsomeone or something interrupts you, start back at the beginningto anchor your foundation for the performance that follows. Chapter_4.indd   101Chapter_4.indd   1014/21/10   1:02:31 PMThe key to becoming world-class in your endeavors is to build 
your performance around world-class routines. It can be dif cult,even futile, to predict or control what will show up in the middleof your workday. But you can almost always control how your daystarts and ends. I have routines for both. I’ll share aspects of eachhere to give you some ideas and to help you better understandthe power and importance of building your new behaviors intodisciplined routines. Starting with my goals in mind, I designedmy behaviors and routines accordingly. Perhaps in sharing someof what works for me, you’ll identify strategies you’d like to try...Rise & Shine My morning routine is my Jack Nicklaus pre-shot preparation;it sets me up for the entire day. Because it happens every morning,it’s locked in and I don’t have to think about it. My iPhone alarmgoes off at 5 a.m. (confession: sometimes, 5:30 a.m.) and I hit theSnooze button. Then I know I have eight minutes. Why eight?I have no idea, ask Steve Jobs; he programmed it. During thoseeight minutes I do three things: First, I think of all the things I’mgrateful for. I know I need to attune my mind to abundance. Theworld looks, acts, and responds to you very differently whenyou start your day with a feeling and orientation of gratitudefor that which you already have. Second, I do something thatsounds a bit odd, but I send love to someone. The way to getlove is to give it, and one thing I want more of is love. I give loveby thinking of one person, anyone (it could be a friend, relative,co-worker, or someone I just met in the supermarket—it doesn’tChapter_4.indd   102Chapter_4.indd   1024/21/10   1:02:34 PM4/21/10   1:02:34 PM103MOMENTUMmatter), and then I send them love by imagining all that I wishand hope for them. Some would call this a blessing or a prayer;I call it a mental love letter. Third, I think about my No. 1 goaland decide which three things I’m going to do on this day tomove closer toward reaching it. For example, at the time of thiswriting, my No. 1 goal is to deepen the love and intimacy in mymarriage. Each morning I plan three things I can do to make surethat my wife feels loved, respected, and beautiful.When I get up, I put on a pot of coffee, and while it’s brewing,I do a series of stretches for about ten minutes—something Ipicked up from Dr. Oz. If you’ve lifted weights your whole lifeas I have, you get stiff. I realized that the only way I was going toincorporate more stretching into my life was to make it a routine.gure out where in my schedule I could stick it in—andwhile the coffee’s brewing is as good a time as any.Once I’ve stretched and poured my cup, I sit in my comfyleather recliner, set my iPhone for thirty minutes (no more, noless), and read something positive and instructional. When thealarm sounds, I take my most important project and work on itfor an hour of completely focused and undistracted effort (notice Ihaven’t opened e-mail yet). Then, every morning at 7 a.m., I havewhat I call my calibration appointment, a recurring appointmentset in my calendar, wher fteen minutes to calibrate myday. This is where I brush over my top thr ve-year goals, my key quarterly objectives, and my top goal forthe week and month. Then, for the most important part of thecalibration appointment, I review (or set) my top three MVPs(Most Valuable Priorities) for that day, asking myself, “If I onlydid three things today, what are the actions that will produce theChapter_4.indd   103Chapter_4.indd   1034/21/10   1:02:37 PM
urry of tasks anddelegations to get the rest of my team started on their day. I thenquickly close down my e-mail and go to work on my MVPs. The rest of the day can take a million different shapes, but as longas I go through my morning routine, a majority of the key disciplinesI need to be practicing are taken care of, and I’m properly groundedand prepared to perform at a much higher level than if I startedeach day erratically—or worse, with a set of bad habits.Sweet Dreams In the evening I like to “cash out”—something I learned fromwaiting tables in my youth. Before we could go home, we hadto cash out, meaning turn in all our receipts, credit card slips,and cash. Everything had to add up, or there was big trouble!It’s important to cash out your day’s performance. Comparedto your plan for the day, how did it go? What do you need tocarry over to tomorrow’s plan? What else needs to be added,based on what showed up throughout the day? What’s nolonger important and needs to be scratched out? Additionally,I like to log into my journal any new ideas, ah-has or insights Ipicked up throughout the day—this is how I’ve collected morethan forty journals of incredible ideas, insights, and strategies.Finally, I like to read at least ten pages of an inspirational bookbefore going to sleep. I know the mind continues to process thelast information consumed before bedtime, so I want to focusmy attention on something constructive and helpful in makingprogress with my goals and ambitions. That’s it. All hell canChapter_4.indd   104Chapter_4.indd   1044/21/10   1:02:40 PM4/21/10   1:02:40 PM105MOMENTUMbreak loose throughout the day, but because I control thenish strong.Shake It UpEvery so often I like to interrupt my routines. Otherwise, life getsstale and I plateau. An easy example is working out with weights.When I work out the same way at the same time, doing the samerepetitive movements week after week, my body stops showingcompounded results. I get bored, lose my passion, and big Mo is ano-show. That’s why it’s important to mix it up, challenge yourselfin new ways, and freshen up your experience!Right now I’m working on adding more adventure into mylife. I set weekly, monthly, and yearly goals to do somethingI wouldn’t normally do. Most of the time it’s nothing earth-shattering, but things such as eating different kinds of foods,taking a class, visiting a new destination, or joining a club tomeet new people. This change of pace makes me feel alive,helps recapture my passion, and offers me opportunities forfresh perspectives.Look at your routines. If something that used to energizeyou has become same-old/same-old, or is no longer generatingpowerful results, switch it up.Getting into a Rhythm: Finding Your New GrooveOnce your daily disciplines have become a routine, youwant the succession of those steps to create a rhythm. Whenyour disciplines and actions jibe into a regular weekly, monthly,Chapter_4.indd   105Chapter_4.indd   1054/21/10   1:02:43 PM
the front door for Big Mo.It’s like the wheels of a steam locomotive. At a standstill, it takesvery little to keep it from moving forward—a one-inch block of woodplaced under the front wheel will do the job. It takes an incredibleamount of steam to get the pistons to move and cause a series ofconnections that get the wheels to budge. It’s a slow process. Butonce the train starts rolling, the wheels get into a rhythm. If thepressure remains consistent, the train gains momentum, and watchout! At 55 miles an hour, that train can crash thr ve-foot,steel-reinforced concrete wall and keep on going. Envisioning yoursuccess as an unstoppable locomotive may help you stay enthusiasticabout getting into your own rhythm. See Figure 9.Fig. 9When your disciplines and actions develop a rhythm, you welcomeBig Mo.Chapter_4.indd   106Chapter_4.indd   1064/21/10   1:02:46 PM4/21/10   1:02:46 PM107MOMENTUMAlong with my daily rhythms, I also plan ahead. For instance,in looking again at my goal of deepening the love and intimacy ofmy marriage, I designed a weekly, monthly, and quarterly rhythmschedule. Doesn’t sound too romantic, I know. But maybe you’venoticed that, even when something’s a high priority for you, if it isn’tscheduled on your calendar, it often doesn’t happen, right? Certainlynot with the regularity you’ll need to get into any kind of rhythm.Here’s how it works. Every Friday night is “date night,” andGeorgia and I go out or do something special together. At 6 p.m.,an alarm goes off on both our iPhones, and no matter what we’redoing, date night is on! Every Saturday is FD (Family Day)—which means NO working. Essentially sundown on Friday nightuntil sunup on Sunday morning is time we devote to the marriageand family. If you don’t create these boundaries, one day has aow into the next. Unfortunately, the people whoget shoved aside are often the most important.Every Sunday night, also at 6 p.m., we have our RR (RelationshipReview). This is a practice I picked up from relationship experts Lindaand Richard Eyre during an interview I did with them for our October2009 SUCCESS Audio Series. During this time, we discuss the previousweek’s wins, losses, as well as the adjustments we need to make inour relationship. We start the conversation by telling each other afew things we have appreciated about the other during the previousweek—it’s helpful to start with the good stuff. Then, using an idea Ipicked up fr eld, we ask each other,“On a scale of one to ten (ten being the best), how would you rate ourrelationship this week?” This gets the discussion of wins and lossesowing—oh, boy! Then we discuss the adjustments that need to bemade through this follow-up question: “What would it take to makeChapter_4.indd   107Chapter_4.indd   1074/21/10   1:02:49 PM
heard and validated, and we have made our observations and wishesclear moving into the next week. This is an incredible process. I highlyrecommend it… if you dare!Every month, Georgia and I also schedule something uniqueand memorable. Jim Rohn taught me that life is simply a collectionof experiences; our goal should be to increase the frequency andthe intensity of the good experiences. Once a month we try to dosomething that creates an experience that has some memorableintensity. It could be driving up to the mountains, going on anadventurous hike, driving up to Los Angeles to try a new fancyrestaurant, going sailing in the bay—whatever. Something outof the ordinary that has a heightened experience and creates anindelible memory.Once a quarter we plan a two- to three-day getaway. I like todo a quarterly review of all my goals and life patterns, and this isa great time to do a deeper check-in on how things are going inour relationship. Then we have our special travel vacation, plus ourholiday traditions and our New Year’s hike and goal-setting ritual.You can see that once all this is scheduled, you no longer haveto think about what you need to be doing. Everything happensnaturally. We’ve created a rhythm that gives us momentum.Registering Your RhythmI want to share with you something I created for myself thathelps me keep track of the rhythm of a new behavior. I call it my“Rhythm Register nd it extremely helpful.If you want to drink more water or take more steps each day orChapter_4.indd   108Chapter_4.indd   1084/21/10   1:02:52 PM4/21/10   1:02:52 PM109MOMENTUMFig. 10Chapter_4.indd   109Chapter_4.indd   1094/21/10   1:02:55 PM4/21/10   1:02:55 PM110THECOMPOUNDEFFECTacknowledge your spouse more affectionately—whatever behavioryou’ve decided you need to move toward your goal—you’llwant to track it to make sure you’re establishing a rhythm. SeeFigure 10. You can download a copy of the document for free atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.The Rhythms of LifeWhen people get started in a new endeavor, they almost alwaysoverdo it. Of course, I want you to feel excited about setting up ar nd a program that you canabsolutely, positively do in the long term without renegotiation. Idon’t want you thinking of the rhythms you can do for this week,month, or even the next ninety days; I want you to think about whatyou can do for the rest of your life. The Compound Effect—thepositive results you want to experience in your life—will be theresult of smart choices (and actions) repeated consistently over time.You win when you take the right steps day in and day out. But youset yourself up for failure by doing too much too soon.A friend to theSUCCESSteam (who will remain unnamed toprotect the guilty) decided after seeing a picture I’d posted of himon Twitter that he was going to get in shape. This was a massiveshift of lifestyle for him. On the job, he sits for at least a dozen hoursa day, and he hates to exercise. Previously, he’d explained that helesif it required him to squat and bend down to get them—that’s howmuch of an aversion he had to physical activity. Still, he made aresolution to get in shape. He joined a gym, hired a personal trainer,and began working out two hours a day ve days a week. “RichardChapter_4.indd   110Chapter_4.indd   1104/21/10   1:02:59 PM4/21/10   1:02:59 PM111MOMENTUM[let’s call him],” I said, “that’s a mistake. You will not be able tomaintain that commitment and will eventually stop doing it. You’resetting yourself up for failure.” He pushed back, assuring me thathe’d changed forever. Even his trainer had recommended the intensepush. “I’m committed,” he said. “I want to be able to see my abs.”“Richard, what’s your real goal?” I asked him. I knew he wasn’tgunning to be on the cover of Men’s Fitness. “I want to be trim; I want to be healthy,” he told me. “Why?” Iasked. “I want vitality. I want to be here long enough to see my kidshave kids,” he replied. These were his real, meaningful motivations;Richard wanted to be in it for the long haul. That meant he wassigning on not for bikini season, but a long-term commitmenttness.“Okay,” I said. “You’ve convinced me. But you’re overdoing it.You’re going to get two or three months down the road, and you’regoing to say, ‘I don’t have two hours to work out, so I guess I can’tdo it today.’ That’s going to happen to you over and over again.W ve days a week will turn into two or three, and you’llget discouraged. Soon it will be over. I know you’re r red upright now, so let’s do this: do your two hours a day ve days a week,for now [takes a lot of steam to get the wheels to budge from theinertia], but don’t do it longer than sixty or ninety days. Then, I wantfteen. You can stillve days a week, but I would probably encourage you togo four. Do that another sixty to ninety days. Then I want you toconsider an hour a day for a minimum of three days a week, fourif you’re feeling extra spry. That’s the program I want you to worktoward, because if you don’t get into something you can maintain,you won’t do it at all.”Chapter_4.indd   111Chapter_4.indd   1114/21/10   1:03:02 PMat that moment, he was all gung-ho. He thought he was going to be 
able to stick with his new routine for a lifetime. For someone who’snever worked out to start working out two hours a day ve daysa week, is a sur re dead end. You have to build a program thatve months. It’s okayif you go strong for a while, but you’ve got to see light at the end ofthe tunnel where you can start scaling it back. Y ndve minutes to an hour a few times a week, but to  nd twove days a week, to make your routine work, that’ll neverhappen. Remember, consistency is a critical component of success.The Power of ConsistencyI’ve mentioned that if there’s one discipline that gives me acompetitive advantage, it’s my ability to be consistent. Nothing killsBig Mo quicker and with more certainty than a lack of consistency.Even good, passionate, and ambitious people with good intentionscan fall short when it comes to consistency. But it’s a powerful toolight toward your goals.ew planes from Los Angeles toManhattan, but you took off and landed in every state in between,ew straight thr ve hundred milesper hour in the air and I only traveled at a rate of two hundredmiles per hour, I’d still beat you by a big margin. The time andenergy it takes for you to repeatedly stop and start and get back tomomentum make your trip at least ten times as long. In fact, mostlikely you wouldn’t even make it—you’d run out of fuel (energy,motivation, belief, will) at some point. It’s far easier and requires aChapter_4.indd   112Chapter_4.indd   1124/21/10   1:03:05 PM4/21/10   1:03:05 PM113MOMENTUMlot less energy to take off once and maintain a regular speed (evenif slower than most everyone else) all along the way.The Pump WellWhen you start thinking about slacking off on your routinesand rhythms, consider the massive cost of inconsistency. It is notthe loss of the single action and tiny results it creates; it is the uttercollapse and loss of momentum your entire progress will suffer.Think of a hand-pumped water well, which uses a pipe to draw water up from the water table several feet underground.To get the water to the surface, you have to pump the well’s leverto create the suction that brings the water above the ground andout of the spout. See Figure 11.Fig. 11Consistency is the key to achieving and maintaining momentum.Chapter_4.indd   113Chapter_4.indd   1134/22/10   4:10:40 PMand start pumping really hard. Just as Richard was with his 
t, they’re excited and committed… they pump andpump and pump, but after a few minutes (or a few weeks),when they don’t see any water (results), they give up pumpingthe lever altogether. They don’t realize how long it takes tocreate the vacuum needed to suck the water into the pipe andeventually out of the spout and into their bucket. Just like themerry-go-round, rocket ship, or steam engine breaking freeof inertia, it takes time, massive energy, and consistency topump water. Most people give up, but wise people continueto pump.Those who persevere and continue to pump the lever willeventually get a few drops of water. This is when a lot ofpeople say, “You’ve got to be kidding me! All this pumping,and for what—a few measly drops? Forget it!” Many peoplethrow their hands up in defeat and quit, but wise peoplepersist further.And here’s where the magic happens: If you continue topump, it doesn’t take long before you’ll get a full and steadystream of water. You have your success! Now that the water isowing, you no longer need to pump the lever as hard or asquickly. It becomes easy, actually. All you have to do to keepthe pressure steady is to just pump the leverconsistently. That’sthe Compound Effect.Now, what happens if you let go of the lever for too long?The water falls back down into the ground, and you’re back tosquare one. If you try to pump the lever easily and steadily, youwon’t get any water. Mo is gone; water is at the bottom. TheChapter_4.indd   114Chapter_4.indd   1144/21/10   1:03:11 PM4/21/10   1:03:11 PM115MOMENTUMonly way to get it back up is to pump it really hard all overts and starts. Weget a new business venture going, and then cut out on vacation.We start up a routine of making ten prospecting calls a day,strike a little gold, and then shift into neutral. We get hoppedup about our new “date night” routine with our spouse, butix and microwave popcorn onthe couch Friday nights. I see people buy a new book, sign upfor a new program or seminar, and go like crazy for a couple ofweeks or months. Then they stop and end up right back wherethey started. (Sound familiar?) Miss only a couple weeks of anything—workouts at thegym, affectionate gestures toward your spouse, or the phonecalls that are part of your prospecting routine—and you don’tjust lose the results those two weeks would have produced.If that’s all you lost (which is what most people assume), notmuch damage would be done. But by slacking off for even ashort time, you killed Mo. It’s dead. And that’s a tragedy.Winning the race is all about pace. Be the tortoise. The personwho, given enough time, will beat virtually anybody in anycompetition as a result of positive habits and behaviors appliedconsistently. That’ll put the mojo in your momentum. And keepit there!Making the right choice, holding to right behaviors,practicing perfect habits, staying consistent, and keepingyour momentum is easier said than done, especially in thedynamic, constantly changing, and always challenging worldwe share with billions of other people. In the next chapter Iwill discuss the many influences that (mostly unknowingly)Chapter_4.indd   115Chapter_4.indd   1154/21/10   1:03:14 PM
are pervasive, persuasive, and constant. Learn how to usethem or you might end up losing because of them. Let meshow you how…Chapter_4.indd   116Chapter_4.indd   1164/21/10   1:03:16 PM4/21/10   1:03:16 PM