CHAPTER 4MOMENTUM 
I’d like to introduce you to a very good friend of mine. 
This friend, also close to Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Richard 

Branson, Michael Jordon, Lance Armstrong, Michael Phelps, 

and every other superachiever, will impact your life like no 

other. I’d like to introduce you to Mo, or “Big Mo,” as I like 

to call it. Big Mo is, without doubt, one of the most powerful 

and enigmatic forces of success. You can’t see or feel Mo, 

but you know when you’ve got it. You can’t count on Mo 

showing up to every occasion, but when it does—WOW! Big 

Mo can catapult you into the stratosphere of success. And 

once you’ve got Mo on your side, there’s almost no way 

anyone can catch you. 
I’m excited about this chapter. When you implement the ideas 
outlined ahead, your payoff will be a thousand times (or more) 

what you paid for this book. Seriously, these ideas are BIG! 
Chapter_4.indd   93

Chapter_4.indd   934/21/10   1:02:06 PM

4/21/10   1:02:06 PM94THE COMPOUND EFFECTHarnessing the Power of Big Mo 
If you remember your high-school physics class (you do, don’t 
you?), you’ll recall Newton’s First Law, also known as the 
Law of 
Inertia: Objects at rest tend to stay at rest unless acted on by an outside 

force. Objects in motion tend to stay in motion, unless something stops 

their momentum. Put another way, couch potatoes tend to stay couch 

potatoes. Achievers—people who get into a successful rhythm—

continue busting their butts and end up achieving more and more. 
It’s not easy to build momentum, but once you do, look out! 
Do you remember playing on merry-go-rounds when you were a 

kid? A bunch of your friends piled on, weighing the thing down 

and then chanted as you worked to get the thing moving. Getting 

 rst step was always the hardest—

getting it to move from a standstill. You had to push and pull, 

grimace and groan and throw your entire your body into the 

effort. One step, two steps, three steps—it seemed like you were 

getting nowhere. After a long and hard ef nally you were able 

to get up a little bit of speed and run along side it. Even though 

you were moving (and your friends were cheering louder), to 

get the speed you really wanted, you had to keep running faster 

and faster, pulling it behind you as you ran with all your might. 

Finally, success! You jumped on and joined your friends in the joy 

of feeling the wind in your face and watching the outside world 

turn into a smear of colors. After a while, when the merry-go-

round started to slow down, you’d hop off and run alongside for 

a minute to get the speed back up—or you could simply give it a 

couple good pushes and then hop back on. Once the merry-go-
round was spinning at a good clip, momentum took over, making 

it easy to keep it going. 
Chapter_4.indd   94

Chapter_4.indd   944/21/10   1:02:09 PM

4/21/10   1:02:09 PM95MOMENTUMAdopting any change is the same way. You get started by 
taking one small step, one action at a time. Progress is slow, but 
once a newly formed habit has kicked in, Big Mo joins the party. 

Your success and results compound rapidly. See Figure 8.
Fig. 8
The same thing happens when a rocket ship launches. The space 
shuttle uses mor  ight 

than it does the rest of the entire trip. Why? Because it has to break 

free from the pull of gravity. Once it does, it can glide in orbit. The 

hard part? Getting off the ground. Your old ways and your old 

conditioning are just like the inertia of the merry-go-round or the 
It takes time and energy to get Big Mo, but with it, success and 
results compound rapidly.
Chapter_4.indd   95Chapter_4.indd   954/22/10   5:12:27 PM
4/22/10   5:12:27 PM96THE COMPOUND EFFECTpull of gravity. Everything just wants to stay at rest. You’ll need 

a lot of energy to break your inertia and get your new enterprise 

under way. But once you get momentum, you will be hard to 

stop—virtually unbeatable—even though you’re now putting out 

considerably less effort while receiving greater results. 
Ever wonder why successful people tend to get more 
successful… the rich get richer… the happy get happier… the 
lucky get luckier? They’ve got Mo. When it rains, it pours. 
But momentum works on both sides of the equation—it can 
work for you or against you. Since the Compound Effect is 
always working, negative habits, when left unchecked, can build up 

steam and send you into a tailspin of “unlucky” circumstances 

and consequences. That’s what our friend Brad from Chapter 1 

experienced. He gained thirty-three pounds with a few small bad 

habits, and experienced major job and marriage stress because of 

the negative momentum those habits generated. The law of inertia 

says objects at rest tend to stay at rest—that’s the Compound 

Effect working 
against you. The more time you spend sitting on 
that couch watching Two and a Half Men
, the harder it will be for 
you to get up and get moving. So let’s start RIGHT NOW! 
How do you get Big Mo to pay you a visit? You build up to it. 
You get into the groove, the “zone,” by doing the things we’ve 

covered so far:  
1) Making new choices based on your goals and core values 

2)  Putting those choices to work through new 
positive behaviors 3)  Repeating those healthy actions long enough to establish 
new habits Chapter_4.indd   96

Chapter_4.indd   964/21/10   1:02:16 PM

4/21/10   1:02:16 PM97MOMENTUM4) Building routines and rhythms into your daily disciplines 

5) Staying consistent over a long enough period of time 
Then, BANG! Big Mo kicks in your door (that’s a good thing)! And you’re virtually unstoppable. 
Think about swimmer Michael Phelps, who won a legendary 
eight gold medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. How 

did he do it? Working with his coach, Bob Bowman, Phelps honed 

his talents over the course of twelve years. Together, they built 

routines and rhythms, and developed a consistency of performance 

that prepared Phelps to catch momentum just at the right time—the 

Olympic Games. Phelps and Bowman’s symbiotic relationship is 

legendary for its scope and ambition—and its utter predictability. 

Bowman required such consistency when it came to practice that 

one of Phelps’ most vivid memories is when Bowman allowed 

 nish a training session 
15 minutes early so he could get 
ready for a middle-school dance! That’s one time in twelve years! 

No wonder Phelps was so unbeatable in the pool!Chances are you have an iPod. Ever think about the evolution 
that made it possible for that little gizmo to wind up in your pocket? 

Apple was around a long time before they launched the iPod. While 

Mac computers have always had an intensely loyal following, they 

still comprise a small fraction of the overall PC market. The iPod 

 rst MP3 player out there; Apple was actually 

late to the game. But they had something powerful going for them: 

the consistency of their efforts in maintaining customer loyalty, a 

steadfast commitment to high quality, innovative design, and ease 

of use. They made the MP3 player simple, cool, easy to use and 

play with, and promoted it through entertaining and inventive ad 

campaigns. It worked! It hit a nerve. 
Chapter_4.indd   97

Chapter_4.indd   974/21/10   1:02:19 PM

4/21/10   1:02:19 PM98THE COMPOUND EFFECTBut, the iPod wasn’t an overnight success. In 2001, the year Apple released the iPod, they went from 30 percent revenue 

growth the year previous to -33 percent. The following year, 

2002, was also a negative revenue growth year at -2 percent. But 

2003 saw a shift to a positive 18 percent. Growth came again in 

2004, up to 33 percent. And in 2005, they caught Mo, and BANG! 

Apple catapulted to 68 percent revenue growth and now holds 

more than 70 percent of the MP3 player market share. As you 

know, Big Mo has since helped them dominate the smartphone 

market (with the iPhone) and digital music distribution with 
iTunes. This momentum has also given them a resurgence of 

growth in their original market of personal computers. With Big 

Mo on their side, I wouldn’t be surprised to see them expand 
into other markets. Google was a small, struggling search engine for a while; 
today it, too, owns more than 60 percent of its market. YouTube, 

the video-sharing space created in February 2005, of cially 

launched in November of that year. But it wasn’t until they 

featured the “Lazy Sunday” digital short that originally aired 

on Saturday Night Live that people started going to YouTube in 
 nd it. That YouTube video clip went viral—

it got more than 5 million views before NBC asked to have it 

taken down. Then, there was no way to catch them—they had 

Mo. Today YouTube owns more than 60 percent of the video 

market! Google caught up with You Tube’s two young founders 

and paid them $1.65 billion to buy their Mo. Wow!
What do Michael Phelps, Apple, Google, and YouTube have 
in common? They were doing the same things before and after 

they achieved momentum. Their habits, disciplines, routines, and 
Chapter_4.indd   98

Chapter_4.indd   984/21/10   1:02:22 PM

4/21/10   1:02:22 PM99MOMENTUMconsistency were the keys that unlocked momentum for each. And 

they became unstoppable when Big Mo showed up to their party. 
Routine Power 
Some of our best intentions fail because we don’t have a system of execution. When it comes down to it, your new attitudes and 
behaviors must be incorporated into your monthly, weekly, and 

daily routines to affect any real, positive change. A routine is 

something you do every day without fail, so that eventually, like 

brushing your teeth or putting on your seatbelt, you do it without 

conscious thought. Similar to our discussion in the Habits section, 
if you look at anything you do that’s successful, you’ll see that 
you’ve probably developed a routine for it. These routines ease 

life’s stresses by making our actions automatic and effective. To 

reach new goals and develop new habits, it’s necessary to create 

new routines to support your objectives. 
The greater the challenge, the more rigorous our routines need 
to be. Ever wonder why military boot camp is so hard—where 

relatively minor tasks like making the bed, shining your shoes, or 

standing at attention become over-the-top important? Building 

routines to prep soldiers for combat is the most effective way 

to elicit ef cient, productive, and reliable performance under 

intense pressure. The seemingly simplistic routines built and 

developed during basic training are so exact that soft, fearful, 

slovenly teenagers ar dent, mission-

driven soldiers in only eight to twelve weeks. Their routines are 

so well-rehearsed that these young soldiers can instinctively act 

with precision in the middle of the chaos of combat. That intense 
Chapter_4.indd   99

Chapter_4.indd   994/21/10   1:02:25 PM

4/21/10   1:02:25 PM100THE COMPOUND EFFECTlevel of training and practice prepares soldiers to carry out their 

duties—even under the threat of imminent death. 
Now, your days might not be as dangerous, but without the 
proper routines built into your schedule, the results of your life 

can be unruly and unnecessarily hard. Developing a routine of 

predictable, daily disciplines prepares you to be victorious on 

 eld of life. 
Golfer Jack Nicklaus was famous for his pre-shot routine. He was 
religious about the “dance” he would do before every shot, a series 

of routine mental and physical steps that got him fully focused and 

ready for the shot. Jack would start out behind the ball, and then 

pick out one or two intermediate spots between the ball and the 

target. As he walked around and appr rst thing 

he would do is line up his clubface to his intermediate target. He 

wouldn’t put his feet into position until he felt he had his clubface 

properly squared up. Then he would take his stance. From there, he 

would waggle the club and look out to his target, then back to his 

intermediate target and back to the golf club, with a repeat of the 

view. Then, and only then, would he strike the ball. 
During one of the important Majors, a psychologist timed Nicklaus from the moment he pulled the club out of the bag 

until the moment he hit the ball, and guess what? In each shot, 
fr rst tee to the eighteenth green, the timing of Jack’s 

routine supposedly 
never varied more than 
one second. That is amazing! The same psychologist measured Greg Norman during 

his unfortunate collapse at the 1996 Masters. Lo and behold, his 
pre-shot routine got faster and faster as the round progressed. 

Varying his routine stunted his rhythm and consistency; he was 

never able to catch momentum. The moment Norman changed Chapter_4.indd   100

Chapter_4.indd   1004/21/10   1:02:28 PM

4/21/10   1:02:28 PM101MOMENTUMhis routine, his performance became unpredictable and his 

results erratic. 
Football kickers likewise cherish their pre-kick routines, which 
allow them to get into sync with the thousands of times they have 
done this same action. Predictably, without a pre-kick routine, 

their performance under time pressure greatly diminishes. Pilots 

go through their pr ight checklist. Even when a pilot has logged 

thousands of hours and the plane just came in with a “perfect” 
performance review from a previous destination, the pilot goes 

through a pr ight checklist every time without fail. This not 

only prepares the plane, but, more important, centers the pilot 

and prepares him for the upcoming performance. 
Of all the high-achievers and business owners I’ve worked with, I’ve seen that, along with good habits, each has developed 
routines for accomplishing necessary daily disciplines. It’s the 

only way any of us can predictably regulate our behavior. There 

simply isn’t any way around it. A daily routine built on good 

habits and disciplines separates the most successful among us 
from everyone else. A routine is exceptionally powerful. 
To create pr table and effective r rst 
decide what behaviors and habits you want to implement. Take 

a moment to review your goals from Chapter 3, as well as the 

behaviors you want to add and subtract. Now it’s your turn to 
 gure out your best pre-shot routine. Be 

intentional about what components belong. Once you establish, 
say, a morning routine, I want you to consider it cast in concrete 

until further notice. You get up. You do it—no argument. If 

someone or something interrupts you, start back at the beginning 

to anchor your foundation for the performance that follows. Chapter_4.indd   101

Chapter_4.indd   1014/21/10   1:02:31 PM

4/21/10   1:02:31 PM102THE COMPOUND EFFECTBookend Your Days 
The key to becoming world-class in your endeavors is to build 
your performance around world-class routines. It can be dif cult, 

even futile, to predict or control what will show up in the middle 

of your workday. But you can almost always control how your day 

starts and ends. I have routines for both. I’ll share aspects of each 

here to give you some ideas and to help you better understand 

the power and importance of building your new behaviors into 

disciplined routines. Starting with my goals in mind, I designed 

my behaviors and routines accordingly. Perhaps in sharing some 

of what works for me, you’ll identify strategies you’d like to try... 
Rise & Shine My morning routine is my Jack Nicklaus pre-shot preparation; 
it sets me up for the entire day. Because it happens every morning, 

it’s locked in and I don’t have to think about it. My iPhone alarm 
goes off at 5 a.m. (confession: sometimes, 5:30 a.m.) and I hit the 

Snooze button. Then I know I have eight minutes. Why eight? 
I have no idea, ask Steve Jobs; he programmed it. During those 

eight minutes I do three things: First, I think of all the things I’m 

grateful for. I know I need to attune my mind to abundance. The 

world looks, acts, and responds to you very differently when 

you start your day with a feeling and orientation of gratitude 
for that which you already have. Second, I do something that 

sounds a bit odd, but I send love to someone. The way to get 
love is to give it, and one thing I want more of is love. I give love 

by thinking of one person, anyone (it could be a friend, relative, 

co-worker, or someone I just met in the supermarket—it doesn’t 
Chapter_4.indd   102

Chapter_4.indd   1024/21/10   1:02:34 PM

4/21/10   1:02:34 PM103MOMENTUMmatter), and then I send them love by imagining all that I wish 
and hope for them. Some would call this a blessing or a prayer; 
I call it a mental love letter. Third, I think about my No. 1 goal 

and decide which three things I’m going to do on this day to 

move closer toward reaching it. For example, at the time of this 

writing, my No. 1 goal is to deepen the love and intimacy in my 
marriage. Each morning I plan three things I can do to make sure 

that my wife feels loved, respected, and beautiful. 
When I get up, I put on a pot of coffee, and while it’s brewing, 
I do a series of stretches for about ten minutes—something I 

picked up from Dr. Oz. If you’ve lifted weights your whole life 

as I have, you get stiff. I realized that the only way I was going to 

incorporate more stretching into my life was to make it a routine. 

 gure out where in my schedule I could stick it in—and 

while the coffee’s brewing is as good a time as any. 
Once I’ve stretched and poured my cup, I sit in my comfy 
leather recliner, set my iPhone for thirty minutes (no more, no 

less), and read something positive and instructional. When the 

alarm sounds, I take my most important project and work on it 

for an hour of completely focused and undistracted effort (notice I 

haven’t opened e-mail yet). Then, every morning at 7 a.m., I have 
what I call my calibration appointment, a recurring appointment 

set in my calendar, wher fteen minutes to calibrate my 

day. This is where I brush over my top thr ve-

year goals, my key quarterly objectives, and my top goal for 
the week and month. Then, for the most important part of the 
calibration appointment, I review (or set) my top three MVPs 

(Most Valuable Priorities) for that day, asking myself, “If I only 

did three things today, what are the actions that will produce the 
Chapter_4.indd   103

Chapter_4.indd   1034/21/10   1:02:37 PM

4/21/10   1:02:37 PM104THE COMPOUND EFFECTgreatest results in moving me closer to my big goals?” Then, and 

 urry of tasks and 

delegations to get the rest of my team started on their day. I then 

quickly close down my e-mail and go to work on my MVPs. The rest of the day can take a million different shapes, but as long 
as I go through my morning routine, a majority of the key disciplines 

I need to be practicing are taken care of, and I’m properly grounded 

and prepared to perform at a much higher level than if I started 

each day erratically—or worse, with a set of bad habits. 
Sweet Dreams In the evening I like to “cash out”—something I learned from 
waiting tables in my youth. Before we could go home, we had 

to cash out, meaning turn in all our receipts, credit card slips, 

and cash. Everything had to add up, or there was big trouble! 
It’s important to cash out your day’s performance. Compared 
to your plan for the day, how did it go? What do you need to 

carry over to tomorrow’s plan? What else needs to be added, 

based on what showed up throughout the day? What’s no 

longer important and needs to be scratched out? Additionally, 

I like to log into my journal any new ideas, ah-has or insights I 

picked up throughout the day—this is how I’ve collected more 

than forty journals of incredible ideas, insights, and strategies. 

Finally, I like to read at least ten pages of an inspirational book 

before going to sleep. I know the mind continues to process the 

last information consumed before bedtime, so I want to focus 

my attention on something constructive and helpful in making 

progress with my goals and ambitions. That’s it. All hell can 
Chapter_4.indd   104

Chapter_4.indd   1044/21/10   1:02:40 PM

4/21/10   1:02:40 PM105MOMENTUMbreak loose throughout the day, but because I control the 

 nish strong. 
Shake It UpEvery so often I like to interrupt my routines. Otherwise, life gets 
stale and I plateau. An easy example is working out with weights. 

When I work out the same way at the same time, doing the same 

repetitive movements week after week, my body stops showing 

compounded results. I get bored, lose my passion, and big Mo is a 

no-show. That’s why it’s important to mix it up, challenge yourself 

in new ways, and freshen up your experience! 
Right now I’m working on adding more adventure into my 
life. I set weekly, monthly, and yearly goals to do something 

I wouldn’t normally do. Most of the time it’s nothing earth-
shattering, but things such as eating different kinds of foods, 

taking a class, visiting a new destination, or joining a club to 
meet new people. This change of pace makes me feel alive, 
helps recapture my passion, and offers me opportunities for 

fresh perspectives. 
Look at your routines. If something that used to energize 
you has become same-old/same-old, or is no longer generating 
powerful results, switch it up. 
Getting into a Rhythm: Finding Your New Groove 
Once your daily disciplines have become a routine, you 
want the succession of those steps to create a rhythm. When 

your disciplines and actions jibe into a regular weekly, monthly, 
Chapter_4.indd   105

Chapter_4.indd   1054/21/10   1:02:43 PM

4/21/10   1:02:43 PM106THE COMPOUND EFFECTquarterly, and yearly rhythm, it’s like laying a welcome mat at 

the front door for Big Mo. 
It’s like the wheels of a steam locomotive. At a standstill, it takes 
very little to keep it from moving forward—a one-inch block of wood 

placed under the front wheel will do the job. It takes an incredible 

amount of steam to get the pistons to move and cause a series of 

connections that get the wheels to budge. It’s a slow process. But 

once the train starts rolling, the wheels get into a rhythm. If the 

pressure remains consistent, the train gains momentum, and watch 

out! At 55 miles an hour, that train can crash thr ve-foot, 

steel-reinforced concrete wall and keep on going. Envisioning your 

success as an unstoppable locomotive may help you stay enthusiastic 

about getting into your own rhythm. See Figure 9.
Fig. 9
When your disciplines and actions develop a rhythm, you welcome 

Big Mo.Chapter_4.indd   106

Chapter_4.indd   1064/21/10   1:02:46 PM

4/21/10   1:02:46 PM107MOMENTUMAlong with my daily rhythms, I also plan ahead. For instance, 
in looking again at my goal of deepening the love and intimacy of 

my marriage, I designed a weekly, monthly, and quarterly rhythm 

schedule. Doesn’t sound too romantic, I know. But maybe you’ve 

noticed that, even when something’s a high priority for you, if it isn’t 

scheduled on your calendar, it often doesn’t happen, right? Certainly 

not with the regularity you’ll need to get into any kind of rhythm. 
Here’s how it works. Every Friday night is “date night,” and 
Georgia and I go out or do something special together. At 6 p.m., 

an alarm goes off on both our iPhones, and no matter what we’re 

doing, date night is on! Every Saturday is FD (Family Day)—

which means NO working. Essentially sundown on Friday night 

until sunup on Sunday morning is time we devote to the marriage 

and family. If you don’t create these boundaries, one day has a 

 ow into the next. Unfortunately, the people who 

get shoved aside are often the most important. 
Every Sunday night, also at 6 p.m., we have our RR (Relationship 
Review). This is a practice I picked up from relationship experts Linda 

and Richard Eyre during an interview I did with them for our October 

2009 SUCCESS Audio Series. During this time, we discuss the previous 

week’s wins, losses, as well as the adjustments we need to make in 

our relationship. We start the conversation by telling each other a 

few things we have appreciated about the other during the previous 

week—it’s helpful to start with the good stuff. Then, using an idea I 

picked up fr eld, we ask each other, 

“On a scale of one to ten (ten being the best), how would you rate our 

relationship this week?” This gets the discussion of wins and losses 

 owing—oh, boy! Then we discuss the adjustments that need to be 

made through this follow-up question: “What would it take to make 
Chapter_4.indd   107

Chapter_4.indd   1074/21/10   1:02:49 PM

4/21/10   1:02:49 PM108THE COMPOUND EFFECTyour experience a ten?” By the end of the discussion, both of us feel 

heard and validated, and we have made our observations and wishes 

clear moving into the next week. This is an incredible process. I highly 

recommend it… if you dare! 
Every month, Georgia and I also schedule something unique 
and memorable. Jim Rohn taught me that life is simply a collection 
of experiences; our goal should be to increase the frequency and 

the intensity of the good experiences. Once a month we try to do 
something that creates an experience that has some memorable 

intensity. It could be driving up to the mountains, going on an 

adventurous hike, driving up to Los Angeles to try a new fancy 

restaurant, going sailing in the bay—whatever. Something out 

of the ordinary that has a heightened experience and creates an 

indelible memory. 
Once a quarter we plan a two- to three-day getaway. I like to 
do a quarterly review of all my goals and life patterns, and this is 

a great time to do a deeper check-in on how things are going in 

our relationship. Then we have our special travel vacation, plus our 

holiday traditions and our New Year’s hike and goal-setting ritual. 

You can see that once all this is scheduled, you no longer have 

to think about what you need to be doing. Everything happens 

naturally. We’ve created a rhythm that gives us momentum. 
Registering Your Rhythm 
I want to share with you something I created for myself that 
helps me keep track of the rhythm of a new behavior. I call it my 

“Rhythm Register nd it extremely helpful. 

If you want to drink more water or take more steps each day or 
Chapter_4.indd   108

Chapter_4.indd   1084/21/10   1:02:52 PM

4/21/10   1:02:52 PM109MOMENTUMFig. 10
Chapter_4.indd   109

Chapter_4.indd   1094/21/10   1:02:55 PM

4/21/10   1:02:55 PM110
THE 
COMPOUND
 
EFFECT
acknowledge your spouse more affectionately—whatever behavior 
you’ve decided you need to move toward your goal—you’ll 
want to track it to make sure you’re establishing a rhythm. See 
Figure 10. You can download a copy of the document for free at 
w
w
w
.
T
h
e
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
E
f
f
e
c
t
.
c
o
m
/
f
r
e
e
. 
The Rhythms of Life 
When people get started in a new endeavor, they almost always 
overdo it. Of course, I want you to feel excited about setting up a 
r nd a program that you can 
absolutely, positively do in the long term without renegotiation. I 
don’t want you thinking of the rhythms you can do for this week, 
month, or even the next ninety days; I want you to think about what 
you can do for the rest of your life. The Compound Effect—the 
positive results you want to experience in your life—will be the 
result of smart choices (and actions) repeated consistently over time. 
You win when you take the right steps day in and day out. But you 
set yourself up for failure by doing too much too soon. 
A friend to the 
SUCCESS
 team (who will remain unnamed to 
protect the guilty) decided after seeing a picture I’d posted of him 
on Twitter that he was going to get in shape. This was a massive 
shift of lifestyle for him. On the job, he sits for at least a dozen hours 
a day, and he hates to exercise. Previously, he’d explained that he 
  les 
if it required him to squat and bend down to get them—that’s how 
much of an aversion he had to physical activity. Still, he made a 
resolution to get in shape. He joined a gym, hired a personal trainer, 
and began working out two hours a day ve days a week. “Richard 
Chapter_4.indd   110
Chapter_4.indd   110
4/21/10   1:02:59 PM
4/21/10   1:02:59 PM
111MOMENTUM[let’s call him],” I said, “that’s a mistake. You will not be able to 

maintain that commitment and will eventually stop doing it. You’re 

setting yourself up for failure.” He pushed back, assuring me that 

he’d changed forever. Even his trainer had recommended the intense 

push. “I’m committed,” he said. “I want to be able to see my abs.” 
“Richard, what’s your real goal?” I asked him. I knew he wasn’t 
gunning to be on the cover of Men’s Fitness
. “I want to be trim; I want to be healthy,” he told me. “Why?” I 
asked. “I want vitality. I want to be here long enough to see my kids 

have kids,” he replied. These were his real, meaningful motivations; 

Richard wanted to be in it for the long haul. That meant he was 

signing on not for bikini season, but a long-term commitment 

 tness. 
“Okay,” I said. “You’ve convinced me. But you’re overdoing it. 
You’re going to get two or three months down the road, and you’re 

going to say, ‘I don’t have two hours to work out, so I guess I can’t 

do it today.’ That’s going to happen to you over and over again. 

W ve days a week will turn into two or three, and you’ll 

get discouraged. Soon it will be over. I know you’re r red up 

right now, so let’s do this: do your two hours a day ve days a week, 

for now [takes a lot of steam to get the wheels to budge from the 

inertia], but don’t do it longer than sixty or ninety days. Then, I want 

 fteen. You can still 

 ve days a week, but I would probably encourage you to 

go four. Do that another sixty to ninety days. Then I want you to 

consider an hour a day for a minimum of three days a week, four 

if you’re feeling extra spry. That’s the program I want you to work 

toward, because if you don’t get into something you can maintain, 

you won’t do it at all.” 
Chapter_4.indd   111

Chapter_4.indd   1114/21/10   1:03:02 PM

4/21/10   1:03:02 PM112THE COMPOUND EFFECTI really had to struggle to get Richard to comprehend this because, 
at that moment, he was all gung-ho. He thought he was going to be 

able to stick with his new routine for a lifetime. For someone who’s 

never worked out to start working out two hours a day ve days 

a week, is a sur re dead end. You have to build a program that 

   ve months. It’s okay 

if you go strong for a while, but you’ve got to see light at the end of 

the tunnel where you can start scaling it back. Y nd 

 ve minutes to an hour a few times a week, but to  nd two 
 ve days a week, to make your routine work, that’ll never 

happen. Remember, consistency is a critical component of success. 
The Power of Consistency 
I’ve mentioned that if there’s one discipline that gives me a 
competitive advantage, it’s my ability to be consistent. Nothing kills 

Big Mo quicker and with more certainty than a lack of consistency. 

Even good, passionate, and ambitious people with good intentions 

can fall short when it comes to consistency. But it’s a powerful tool 

 ight toward your goals. 
 ew planes from Los Angeles to 
Manhattan, but you took off and landed in every state in between, 

 ew straight thr ve hundred miles 
per hour in the air and I only traveled at a rate of two hundred 

miles per hour, I’d still beat you by a big margin. The time and 

energy it takes for you to repeatedly stop and start and get back to 

momentum make your trip at least ten times as long. In fact, most 

likely you wouldn’t even make it—you’d run out of fuel (energy, 

motivation, belief, will) at some point. It’s far easier and requires a 
Chapter_4.indd   112

Chapter_4.indd   1124/21/10   1:03:05 PM

4/21/10   1:03:05 PM113MOMENTUMlot less energy to take off once and maintain a regular speed (even 
if slower than most everyone else) all along the way. 
The Pump Well
When you start thinking about slacking off on your routines 
and rhythms, consider the massive cost of inconsistency. It is not 

the loss of the single action and tiny results it creates; it is the utter 

collapse and loss of momentum your entire progress will suffer.
Think of a hand-pumped water well, which uses a pipe to draw water up from the water table several feet underground. 

To get the water to the surface, you have to pump the well’s lever 

to create the suction that brings the water above the ground and 

out of the spout. See Figure 11.
Fig. 11
Consistency is the key to achieving and maintaining momentum.
Chapter_4.indd   113Chapter_4.indd   1134/22/10   4:10:40 PM
4/22/10   4:10:40 PM114THE COMPOUND EFFECTWhen most people start a new endeavor, they grab the lever 
and start pumping really hard. Just as Richard was with his 

 t, they’re excited and committed… they pump and 

pump and pump, but after a few minutes (or a few weeks), 

when they don’t see any water (results), they give up pumping 

the lever altogether. They don’t realize how long it takes to 

create the vacuum needed to suck the water into the pipe and 

eventually out of the spout and into their bucket. Just like the 

merry-go-round, rocket ship, or steam engine breaking free 

of inertia, it takes time, massive energy, and consistency to 

pump water. Most people give up, but wise people continue 

to pump. 
Those who persevere and continue to pump the lever will 
eventually get a few drops of water. This is when a lot of 

people say, “You’ve got to be kidding me! All this pumping, 

and for what—a few measly drops? Forget it!” Many people 

throw their hands up in defeat and quit, but wise people 

persist further. 
And here’s where the magic happens: If you continue to 
pump, it doesn’t take long before you’ll get a full and steady 

stream of water. You have your success! Now that the water is 

 owing, you no longer need to pump the lever as hard or as 

quickly. It becomes easy, actually. All you have to do to keep 

the pressure steady is to just pump the lever 
consistently. That’s 
the Compound Effect. 
Now, what happens if you let go of the lever for too long? 
The water falls back down into the ground, and you’re back to 

square one. If you try to pump the lever easily and steadily, you 

won’t get any water. Mo is gone; water is at the bottom. The 
Chapter_4.indd   114

Chapter_4.indd   1144/21/10   1:03:11 PM

4/21/10   1:03:11 PM115MOMENTUMonly way to get it back up is to pump it really hard all over 

 ts and starts. We 

get a new business venture going, and then cut out on vacation. 

We start up a routine of making ten prospecting calls a day, 

strike a little gold, and then shift into neutral. We get hopped 

up about our new “date night” routine with our spouse, but 

 ix and microwave popcorn on 

the couch Friday nights. I see people buy a new book, sign up 
for a new program or seminar, and go like crazy for a couple of 

weeks or months. Then they stop and end up right back where 

they started. (Sound familiar?) Miss only a couple weeks of anything—workouts at the 
gym, affectionate gestures toward your spouse, or the phone 

calls that are part of your prospecting routine—and you don’t 

just lose the results those two weeks would have produced. 

If that’s all you lost (which is what most people assume), not 

much damage would be done. But by slacking off for even a 

short time, you killed Mo. It’s dead. And that’s a tragedy. 
Winning the race is all about pace. Be the tortoise. The person 
who, given enough time, will beat virtually anybody in any 

competition as a result of positive habits and behaviors applied 

consistently. That’ll put the mojo in your momentum. And keep 

it there! 
Making the right choice, holding to right behaviors, 
practicing perfect habits, staying consistent, and keeping 

your momentum is easier said than done, especially in the 

dynamic, constantly changing, and always challenging world 

we share with billions of other people. In the next chapter I 

will discuss the many influences that (mostly unknowingly) 
Chapter_4.indd   115

Chapter_4.indd   1154/21/10   1:03:14 PM

4/21/10   1:03:14 PM116THE COMPOUND EFFECTcan help or hinder your ability to succeed. These influences 

are pervasive, persuasive, and constant. Learn how to use 

them or you might end up losing because of them. Let me 

show you how… 
Chapter_4.indd   116

Chapter_4.indd   1164/21/10   1:03:16 PM

4/21/10   1:03:16 PM117
MOMENTUM
Put the Compound Effect to Work for You 
Summary Action Steps 
Build your bookend morning and evening routines. 
 

Design a predicable and fail-safe world-class routine 
schedule for you  life. 
List three areas of life in which you are not consistent 
 

enough. What has this inconsistency cost you in life thus 
far? Make a declaration to stay steadfast in your new 
commitment to consistency. 
On your Rhythm Register, write down a half-dozen 
 

key behaviors relevant to your new goals. These should 
be behaviors you want to establish a rhythm with and 
eventually create momentum—Big Mo. Download the 
Rhythm Register at 
w
w
w
.
T
h
e
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
E
f
f
e
c
t
.
c
o
m
/
f
r
e
e
. 
Chapter_4.indd   117
Chapter_4.indd   117
4/21/10   1:03:19 PM
4/21/10   1:03:19 PM
