CHAPTER 5 INFLU
ENCE S Hopefully by now you understand exactly how important your choices are. Even those that seem insigni˜cant, when compounded, can make an extreme impact on your life. We™ve  also discussed the fact that you are 100 percent responsible for  your life. You alone are responsible for the choices you make  and the actions you take. That said, you must also realize your  choices, behaviors, and habits are in˚uenced by very powerful  external forces. Most of us aren™t aware of the subtle control  these forces have on our lives. For you to sustain your positive  trajectory toward your goals, you™ll need to understand and  govern these in˚uences so they will support rather than derail  your journey toward success. Everyone is affected by three kinds  of in˚uences: input (what you feed your mind), associations  (the people with whom you spend time), and environment  (your surroundings). 120THE COMPOUND EFFECTI. Input: Garbage In, Garbage Out If you want your body to run at peak performance, you’ve got to be vigilant about consuming the highest-quality nutrients and avoiding tempting junk food. If you want your brain to perform at its peak, you’ve got to be even more vigilant about  what you feed it. Are you feeding it news summaries or mind-  numbing sitcoms? Are you reading the tabloids, or SUCCESS? Controlling the input has a direct and measurable impact on  your productivity and outcomes. Controlling what our brains consume is especially dif cult because so much of what we take in is unconscious. Although it’s  true that we can eat without thinking, it’s easier to pay attention  to what we put in our bodies because food doesn’t leap into  our mouths. We need an extra level of vigilance to prevent our  brains from absorbing irrelevant, counterproductive or downright  destructive input. It’s a never-ending battle to be selective and  to stand guard against any information that can derail your  creative potential. Your brain is not designed to make you happy. Your brain has only one agenda in mind: survival. It is always watching for signs of “lack and attack.” Your brain is programmed to seek  out the negative—dwindling resources, destructive weather,  whatever’s out to hurt you. So when you switch on that radio on  the way to work and get bombarded with all those reports about  r res, attacks, the tanking economy, your brain lights  up—it now will spend all day chewing over that feast of fear,  worry, negativity. Same deal when you tune into the evening  news after work. More bad news? Perfect! Your mind will stew  on that all night long.    INFLUENCES Left to its own devices, your mind will traf c in the negative, worrisome, and fearful all day and night. We can’t change our DNA, but we can change our behavior. We can teach our minds to look beyond “lack and attack.” How? We can protect and feed our mind. We can be disciplined and proactive about what we allow in. To identify the inﬂ uence that information and your environment has on you, complete the Input Inﬂ uences sheet Sheet on page 172, or download at w w w . T h e C o m p o u n d E f f e c t . c o m / f r e e . Don’t Drink Dirty Water You get in life what you create. Expectation drives the creative process. What do you expect? You expect whatever it is you’re thinking about. Your thought process, the conversation in your head, is at the base of the results you create in life. So the question is, What are you thinking about? uencing and directing your thoughts? The answer: whatever you’re allowing yourself to hear and see. This is the input you are feeding your brain. Period. See Figure 12. Your mind is like an empty glass; it’ll hold anything you put into it. You put in sensational news, salacious headlines, talk- show rants, and you’re pouring dirty water into your glass. If you’ve got dark, dismal, worrisome water in your glass, everything you cr ltered through that muddy mess, because that’s what you’ll be thinking about. Garbage 122THE COMPOUND EFFECTFig. 12 in, garbage out. All that drive-time radio yak about murders, conspiracy, deaths, economy, and political battles drives your  thinking process, which drives your expectations, which drives  your creative output. That IS bad news. But just like a dirty  ush it with clean, clear water under the faucet  long enough, eventually you’ll end up with a glass of pure,  clear water. What is that clear water? Positive, inspirational, and  supportive input and ideas. Stories of aspiration, people who,  despite challenges, are overcoming obstacles and achieving  great things. Strategies of success, prosperity, health, love,  and joy. Ideas to create more abundance, to grow, expand, and  become more. Examples and stories of what’s good, right, and  possible in the world. That’s why we work so hard at SUCCESS magazine. We want to provide you with those examples, those  stories and the key take-aways you can use to improve your Flush out the negative (dirty water) with positive, inspirational and supportive ideas (clean water).  also why I read something inspirational and instructional for  thirty minutes in the morning and evening, and have personal- development CDs playing in my car ushing my glass  and feeding my mind. Does this give me an edge over the guy  rst thing reads the newspaper, listens to  news radio on his commute to and from work, and watches the  evening news before going to bed? You bet it does! And it can  for you, too. Step 1: Stand Guard Unless you decide to hole up in a cave or on a desert island, you’re going to get dirty water in your glass. It’s going to be on  billboards, on CNN while you’re walking through the airport,  on the screaming tabloid headlines at the checkout when you’re  buying groceries, etc. Even your friends, family members, and your  ood dirty water into your glass. But that doesn’t mean you can’t take steps to limit your exposure to all that grime. Maybe you can’t avoid the tabloids  stacked up at the checkout register, but you can cancel your  subscriptions. You can refuse to listen to the radio to and from  work and instead put in an instructional and inspirational CD.  You can turn off the evening news and talk to your loved ones  instead. You can buy a DVR and record only those programs you  feel are truly educational and life-af rming—and speed through  the commercials aimed at making you feel inadequate or lacking  unless you buy more crap. I didn’t really grow up with TV; I remember watching Solid Gold and The A-Team (remember them?), but television wasn’t a   it, and that’s given me a clearer perspective when I watch an  occasional program now. Sure, I’ll laugh along with the sitcom,  but afterward, I feel the same as if I ate fast food—bloated and  malnourished. And I can’t get over how commercials prey on  our psychology, our fears, pains, needs, and weaknesses. If I  walk through life thinking that I’m not enough just as I am—that  I need to buy this, that, and the other thing to be okay—how can I expect to create amazing results? It’s estimated that Americans (twelve and older) spend 1,704 hours watching TV per year. That averages out to 4.7 HOURS  per day. We’re spending almost 30 percent of our waking hours  watching TV. Almost thirty-three hours per week—more than  one whole day each week! It’s the equivalent of watching TV  for two solid months out of every twelve! WOW! And people  wonder why they can’t get ahead in life? Put Yourself on a Media Diet The media thrives on taking us hostage. Ever been stuck on the freeway with traf c backed up for miles, making you late,  wondering what the heck’s holding everything up? Sure enough,  nally get close, you see that nothing physical is  ow of cars; the wreck clearly happened a while ago  and has since been moved to the side of the freeway. The 3-mph  crawl was caused by people rubbernecking! Now you’re really  irritated. But what happens when your car passes the wreck? You slow way down, take your eyes off the road in front of you, and  crane your own neck!     sense of self-preservation. We can’t help ourselves. Even if we’re  adept at avoiding negativity, and have trained ourselves to be  relentlessly positive, when it comes to sensationalism, our basic  nature can’t resist. Media masters understand that. They know  your nature, in many ways better than you. The media has always  used shocking and sensational headlines to draw attention. But today, instead of three news TV and radio networks, there are  hundreds, running 24/7. Instead of a few newspapers, there are  endless portals reaching us from our computers to our phones.  The competition for your attention has never been bloodier, and  the media jockeys continually up the ante in shock value. They nd a dozen or so of the most heinous, scandalous, criminal,  murderous, bleak, and horrid things that happen in the world  each day, and parade them through our papers, news channels,  and the Web over and over. Meanwhile, during that same twenty-  four-hour period, millions of wonderful, beautiful, incredible  things have happened. Yet we hear very little about them. In  being wired to seek out the negative, we create the demand for  more and more. How could the positive news stories ever hope  to compete with those ratings or advertising dollars? Let’s go back to our freeway. Instead of a wreck on the side of the road, what if there was the most stunning, miraculous sunset  you’ve ever seen? What would happen to the traf c then? I’ve  seen this many times. It whizzes by at top speed. The great danger of the media is that it gives us a very perverted view of the world. Because the focus and the repetition of messaging is on the negative, that’s what our minds    working has a sever uence on your creative potential. It can  be crippling. My Personal Junk Filter I’ll share what I do to safeguard my mind. But I warn you, I have a rigorous mental diet. You’ll want to adjust to your own  preferences, but this system has worked beautifully for me. As you might guess, I don’t watch or listen to any news and I don’t read any newspapers or news magazines. Ninety-nine  percent of all news has no bearing on my personal life or my  personal goals, dreams, and ambitions anyway. I have set up  a few RSS feeds identifying the news and industry updates  that do pertain to my direct interests and goals. The news that’s helpful to me gets plucked out of the fray so I don’t have to get  any mud slung into my glass of water. While most people wade  through hours of irrelevant garbage that hampers their thinking  and crushes their spirit, I get the most productive information I  fteen minutes a day. Step 2: Enroll in Drive-Time U  It’s not enough to eliminate negative input. To move in a positive dir  ll up on the good. My car won’t move without two things: gasoline and an ever-present library of instructional CDs I listen to as I drive. The  average American drives about twelve thousand miles a year.  That’s three hundr ushing potential right there!  Brian Tracy taught me the concept of turning my car into a mobile    CDs as I drive, I gain knowledge equivalent to two semesters of an advanced college degree—every year. Think about it; using  the time you’re currently wasting by listening to drive-time radio,  you could obtain the equivalent of Ph.D. in leadership, sales success, wealth building, relationship excellence—or whatever  course you choose. This commitment, in combination with your reading routine, separates you from the herd of average—one  CD, DVD, or book at a time. II. Associations: Who’s Inﬂ uencing You? Bir ock together. The people with whom you habitually associate are called your “reference group.” According  to research by social psychologist Dr. David McClelland of  Harvard, your “reference group” determines as much as 95  percent of your success or failure in life. Who do you spend the most time with? Who are the people you most admire? Are those two groups of people exactly the  same? If not, why not? Jim Rohn taught that we become the ve people we hang around the most.  Rohn would say we could tell the quality of our health, attitude, and income by looking at the people around us. The people  with whom we spend our time determine what conversations dominate our attention, and to which attitudes and opinions we are regularly exposed. Eventually, we start to eat what they eat,  talk like they talk, read what they read, think like they think,  watch what they watch, treat people how they treat them, even  dress like they dress. The funny thing is, more often than not, we    cir ve. How are we not aware? Because your associations don’t shove you in a direction; they nudge you ever so slightly over time.  uence is so subtle that it’s like being on an inner tube  out in the ocean, feeling like you’r oating in place, until you  look up and realize the gentle current has pushed you a half mile  down the shore. Think of your friends who order greasy appetizers or a cocktail before dinner, and that’s their routine. Hang out with  nd yourself grabbing for cheese  nachos and potato skins, and joining them for that extra beer  or glass of wine, matching their pace. Meanwhile, your other  friends order healthy food and talk about the inspiring books  they’re reading and their ambitions in their businesses, and you  begin to assimilate their behaviors and habits. You read and talk  about what they talk about, you see the movies they’re excited  about, and you go to the places they r uence  your friends have over you is subtle and can be positive or  negative; either way, the impact is incredibly powerful. Watch  out! You cannot hang out with negative people and expect to  live a positive life. So, what is the combined average income, health, or attitudes ve people you spend most of your time with? Does the  answer frighten you? If so, the best way to increase your potential  for whatever traits you desire is to spend the majority of your time  with people who already possess those traits. You will then see  uence work for you, rather than against you. The  behaviors and attitudes which helped them acquire the success   INFLUENCES you admire will begin to become part of your daily routine. Hang around them long enough, and you’re likely to realize similar successful outcomes in your life. If you haven’t already ve people you hang around the most. Also write down their main characteristics, both positive and negative. It doesn’t matter who they are. It could be your spouse, your brother, your neighbor, or your assistant. Now, average them out. What’s their average health, and bank balance? What’s their average relationship like? As you look at your results, ask yourself, “Is this list okay for me? Is this where I want to go?” It’s time to reappraise and reprioritize the people you spend time with. These relationships can nurture you, starve you, or keep you stuck. Now that you’ve started to carefully consider with whom you spend your time, let’s go a little deeper. As Jim Rohn taught me, it’s powerful to evaluate and shift your associations into three categories: dissociations, limited associations, and expanded associations. To evaluate your current associations, complete the Association Evaluator sheet on page 173, or download at w w w . T h e C o m p o u n d E f f e c t . c o m / f r e e . Dissociations You guar uences your children are exposed to, and the people they hang around. You are aware of the uence these people could have on your children and the choices they might make as a result. I believe this same principle should apply to you! You already know this: There are some people you might need to break away from. Completely. This 130THE COMPOUND EFFECTmight not be an easy step to take, but it’s essential. You have to  make the har uences affect  you anymore. Determine the quality of life you want to have,  and then surround yourself with the people who represent and  support that vision. I’m constantly weeding out of my life people who refuse to grow and live positively. Growing and changing your  associations is a lifelong process. Some people might say  I’m too rigorous about it, but I’d like to be more so. I had a  business relationship with someone I really liked, but when the  economy got dif cult, most of his conversation was focused on  how horrible things were, how much his company was feeling  the hit, and how hard it was out there. I said, “Man, you’ve got  to stop working on your presentation about how bad life is.  I can hear you collecting all the data points to reinforce your  beliefs.” He persisted in seeing everything as more dour and  hopeless than it was, and I decided we had no business doing  business together. When you make the tough decision to put up boundaries between you and people who drag you down, realize that they’ll  ght you—especially those closest to you. Your decision to live  a more positive, goal-oriented life will be a mirror to their own  poor choices. You will make them uncomfortable and they will  attempt to pull you back down to their level. Their resistance  doesn’t mean they don’t love you or want the best for you—it’s actually not about you at all. It’s about their fear and their guilt about their own poor choices and lack of discipline. Just know that breaking away won’t be easy.   but not three days. Others you can spend three minutes with,  but not three hours. Always r uence of  associations is both powerful and subtle. The person you’re  walking with can determine whether you slow your pace or  guratively. Similarly, you can’t help  but be touched by the dominant attitudes, actions and behaviors  of the people with whom you spend time. Decide how much you can “affor uenced, based on how those people represent themselves. This is dif cult, I know.  I have had to do this on several occasions, even with close family members. I WILL NOT, however, allow someone else’s actions  uence on me. I’ve got a neighbor who’s a three-minute friend. For three minutes, we have a great chit-chat, but we wouldn’t mesh for three hours. I  can hang out with an old high-school friend for three hours, but  he’s not a three-day guy. And, then there are some people I can hang  around for a few days, but wouldn’t go on an extended vacation  with. Take a look at your relationships and make sure you’re not  spending three hours with a three-minute person. Expanded Associations W uencers. While you’re doing that, you’ll also want to reach out. Identify people who have positive qualities in the areas of life where you  want to impr nancial and business success  you desire, the parenting skills you want, the relationships you    with them. Join organizations and businesses and health clubs  where these people gather and make friends. Ahead, you’ll see  how I even used to drive to a different town to spend quality  time—with fortuitous results. I rave about Jim Rohn throughout this book because, aside from my father, Jim remains my foremost mentor and  uencer. My relationship with Jim perfectly  es an  expanded association. While I got to share a few private meals  and spend a little time with him during our interviews and  backstage before events, most of my time with Jim was spent  listening to him in my car or reading his words in my living  room. I have spent more than a thousand hours getting direct  instruction from Jim, and 99 percent of that was through books  and audio programs. What’s exciting about that is, no matter  where you are in your life—maybe busy at home with small  children or caretaking aging parents, working long hours with  people with whom you have little in common, or living out in  the country far from the nearest of ce building—you, too, can  have almost any mentor you want, if he or she has gathered  their best thoughts, stories, and ideas into books, CDs, DVDs,  and podcasts. You have an unlimited bounty from which to  draw. Take advantage of it. If you want to have a better, deeper, more meaningful relationship, ask yourself, “Who has the type of relationship I want? How can  I spend (more) time with that person? Who can I meet who can  uence me?” Let their glow rub off on you. Befriend  the person you think is the biggest, baddest, most successful person  eld. What do they read? Where do they go for lunch? How    associations by joining networking groups, Toastmasters, and  similar organizations. Find the charity organizations, symphonies,  country clubs, where the people you want to emulate gather. Find a Peak-Performance Partner Another way to increase your exposure to expanded associations is by teaming up with a peak performance partner, someone as  equally committed to study and personal growth as you. This  person should be someone you trust, someone bold enough to  tell you what they really think about you, your attitudes, and  performance. It could be that this person is a longtime friend, but  he or she may be someone who doesn’t know you well at all. The  point is to get (and give) an unbiased, honest, outside perspective. My current “accountability partner” is my good friend Landon Taylor. As I mentioned before, we have a thirty-minute  xes, “ah-  has,” and where we are on our growth plans. The anticipation  of the call and knowing I have to be accountable to Landon  keeps me extra committed throughout the week. I make a record of Landon’s losses or any feedback he needs and make sure to ask him about it the next week. He does the  same for me. That way we hold each other accountable. He might say, “Okay, you screwed up here last week and admitted  it and committed to change. What did you do about that this week?” Life is life. We’re both busy executives, but it’s amazing  to me that we actually end up doing this every week without fail. It’s not easy ying through my day and    the call, I’ll think, “I’m so glad we’re having this conversation!”  Even in preparing for it, and thinking of my big wins and losses  for the week, I learn about myself. This week I told Landon, “You know, I’m in the middle of so many things. I’m writing my  book. I’m having a lot of realizations, and so many ah-has, but  not one thing that’s really compelling.” He said, “Let this be the  last week that you don’t come to the table with an ah-ha.” Gulp. “Don’t shortchange me,” he said. Point taken. In reality, I was  shortchanging myself by not identifying one thing memorable enough to share. I have a serious challenge for you if you’re up for it. Want real feedback? Find people who care enough about you to be  brutally honest with you. Ask them these questions: “How do I  show up to you? What do you think my strengths are? In what  areas do you think I can improve? Where do you think I sabotage  t me  the most? What’s the one thing I should start doing?” Invest in Mentorship Paul J. Meyer is another man who served as a mentor to me. Paul passed away in 2009 at age eighty-one. Whenever I thought I was really doing things, really playing at a high level, I’d get  around Paul—he was my reality check. What he did before  lunch was mind-boggling to me. I got to spend a lot of time with him; Paul bought one of my companies, and then I did a turnaround for one of his companies. He was a very powerful  spirit in my life.     trying to make sense of all he had going on exhausted me. After  time with Paul, I’d want to go take a nap! But my association with him raised my game. His walking pace was my running  pace. It expanded my ideas about how big I could play and how ambitious I could be. You have to get around people like that! You’re never too good for a mentor. During my interview with Harvey Mackay, he told me, “I have had twenty coaches, if you  can believe it. I have a speech coach, I have a writing coach, I  have a humor coach, I’ve got a language coach, and on and on.” I  have always found it interesting that the most successful people,  the truly top performers, are the ones willing to hire and pay for  the best coaches and trainers there are. It pays to invest in your  improved performance. Finding and engaging a mentor doesn’t need to be a mysterious or intimidating process either. When I sat down with  Ken Blanchard, he explained the simplicity of engaging a mentor  (SUCCESS rst thing you want to remember with a mentor is that it doesn’t need to take a lot of their time. The best advice I’ve ever gotten is in short clips, having lunch or breakfast with somebody, just telling them what I’m working  on and asking their advice and all. You will be amazed how  successful businesspeople are willing to be mentors to people  when it’s not taking a lot of time.” John Wooden reinforces the  point that others desire to be mentors ( SUCCESS, September 2008): “Mentoring is your true legacy. It is the greatest inheritance  you can give to others. And it should never end. It is why you  get up every day. To teach and be taught.” He went on to explain    be open to being mentored. It is our responsibility to be willing  to allow our lives and our minds to be touched, molded, and strengthened by the people who surround us.” Develop Your Own Personal Board of Advisors As part of my plan to be wiser, more strategic, and operate more effectively, as well as expand the time and interaction I  have with high-minded leaders, I’ve been developing a board of  advisors in my personal life. I’ve hand-selected a dozen people because of their areas of expertise, creative thinking ability, and/or my great respect for  who they are. Once a week I reach out to a few of them and  solicit ideas, run thoughts by them, and ask for feedback and  input. Having started this pr ts  I’ve already received have been profound—far more than I  anticipated! It’s surprising the genius people are willing to share  when you show sincere interest. Who should be on your personal board of advisors? Seek out positive people who have achieved the success you want to create in your own life. Remember the adage: “Never ask advice  of someone with whom you wouldn’t want to trade places.” III. Environment: Changing Your View Changes Your Perspective When I was in real estate, working in the East Bay of San Francisco, I lived and worked within a very limited demographic.    and over nd an elevated circle of  associations in order to go where I wanted to go. I started driving across the bay to one of the richest and most beautiful spots on the planet, Tiburon in Marin County, north of  San Francisco. If you’ve ever been to Monaco, that’s what Tiburon  looks like, but far quainter. It’s a spectacular spot. I would go to a  delightful seafood restaurant, Sam’s on the Wharf. The food was  great, but more importantly, the restaurant was popular with the  area’s more af uent residents. Aside from going to Sam’s to expand my associations, I’d also sit on the wharf and look up at the hillside. I was mesmerized by the multimillion-dollar houses that hung off the cliffs. One in  particular always caught my eye—a blue, four-story home with  an elevator and a whale lightning rod at the top. What would be the perfect house? I used to ask myself all the time. If someone could just give me one of them, which one would I pick? The answer was always the same—this beautiful blue one. It was in the perfect spot with a bright vista, the best of the bunch. On my way home from brunch one morning, I saw an open house sign and thought it’d be fun to check it out. One sign led to another  as I followed them zigzagging up the cliffs along the narrow streets.  nally reached the top of the hill and found the advertised home.  As I entered and walked up to a spectacular bay window, the world  opened up in front of me—the peninsula tip of Tiburon, Angel  Island across the Bay, Berkeley and the East Bay, the Bay Bridge,  and the entire San Francisco skyline over to the Golden Gate Bridge  in a 300-degree expanse. I walked out onto the balcony and looked  around. Suddenly I realized that this was the very house I’d been    on the spot. My dream house was now mine! I can’t really say that I met anybody at Sam’s who changed my life. However, that environment had a powerful effect on  me. Seeing those homes up on the cliffs fueled my ambition  and expanded my dreams. I ended up working harder than I  ever thought possible to make those dreams come true—and  they did! The dream in your heart may be bigger than the environment nd yourself. Sometimes you have to get out of that  environment to see that dr lled. It’s like planting an oak  sapling in a pot. Once it becomes rootbound, its growth is limited.  It needs a great space to become a mighty oak. So do you. When I talk about your environment, I’m not just referring to where you live. I’m referring to whatever surrounds you. Creating  a positive environment to support your success means clearing out  all the clutter in your life. Not just the physical clutter that makes it  hard for you to work productively and ef ciently (although that’s  important too!), but also the psychic clutter of whatever around  you isn’t working, whatever’s broken, whatever makes you cringe.  Each and every incomplete thing in your life exerts a draining force  on you, sucking the energy of accomplishment and success out of  you as surely as a vampire stealing your blood. Every incomplete  promise, commitment, and agreement saps your strength because it  blocks your momentum and inhibits your ability to move forward.  Incomplete tasks keep calling you back to the past to take care of  them. So think about what you can complete today. Additionally, when you’re creating an environment to support your goals, remember that you get in life what you tolerate.    