CHAPTER 6 ACCE
LERATIONWhen I lived in La Jolla, California, for exercise and a test ofwill, I would regularly my bike two miles straight up MountSoledad. There are very few things you can do voluntarily thatcause more pain and suffering than riding a bike up a steepmountain without stopping. There is a point at which you ﬁhitthe wallﬂ and come face to face with your true inner character.Suddenly, all the projections and ideas you had about yourself arestripped away and you™re left with the naked truth. Your mindstarts inventing all sorts of convenient alibis on why it™s okayto stop. It is then when you™re faced with one of life™s greatestquestions: Do you push through the pain and continue on, orwill you crack like a walnut and give up? Lance Armstrong was theSUCCESS cover feature in June2009. I remember watching Lance during his ˜rst Tour de Francevictory. The Tour had entered the grueling mountain stages ofbeen a renowned climber. During the third mountain ascent 
through freezing rains, mist, and then hail, Lance got separatedfr ghting the top climbers in thenal ascent, eighteen miles straight up intoSestrier ve and a half hours climbing mountains, everyrider was suffering. Each needed to search the depths of hisnition—could they endure? It became a testof who could best survive the har nd the strength tokeep going—who would crack and who wouldn’t. W ve miles to go, Lance was thirty-two seconds behind theleaders, an eternity while climbing a mountain on a bike. Duringa curve, Lance stood up and surged ahead until he caught the twoleaders—both established world-class climbers. Having expendedalmost everything he had in him, Lance then launched an attackand gained several lengths on the leaders. He later said in hisbook It’s Not About the Bike: My Journey Back to Life(Putnam, 2000),“When you open a gap and your competitors don’t respond, ittells you something. They’re hurting. And when they’re hurting,that is when you take them.” Completely exhausted, strugglingto breathe, his legs and arms burning with fatigue, Lance keptpounding the pedals. Some tried, but no one could catch him, theyjust didn’t have it in them.  nish line, with  sts pumpingin the air, the unexpected contender won the stage race andultimately the Tour de France.In this chapter I want to talk to you about those moments of truth and how the Compound Effect can help you breakthrough to new and greater levels of success—faster than youimagined possible. When you’ve prepared, practiced, studied,Chapter_6.indd   142Chapter_6.indd   1424/21/10   1:04:46 PM4/21/10   1:04:46 PM143ACCELERATIONand consistently put in the required effort, sooner or later you’llbe presented with your own moment of truth. In that moment,ne who you are and who you are becoming. It is inthose moments where growth and improvement live—when weeither step forward or shrink back, when we climb to the topof the podium and seize the medal or we continue to applaudsullenly from the crowd for others’ victories.We’ll also look at how you can consistently deliver more thanpeople expect, compounding your good fortune even further.Moments of Truth“There is a point in every race when a rider encounters his realopponent and understands that it’s himself,” writes Lance in hisautobiography. “In my most painful moments on the bike, I amat my most curious, and I wonder each and every time how I willrespond. Will I discover my innermost weakness, or will I seekout my innermost strength?”When I was in real estate, I hit the wall several times a day.While driving to an expired listing property, after just gettingpummeled by the last prospect, I’d start conjuring up all sorts ofexcuses to skip the sales call and head back to the of ce. Whileout canvassing a neighborhood, dogs would snarl at me or itlooked like it might start to rain. I’d be in the midst of “moneytime” (5 to 9 p.m., cold-calling) and frequently get chewed outfor interrupting someone’s dinner or favorite TV show. I wassure I needed to take a break to go to the bathroom or get a glassof water. But instead of quitting, every time I hit one of thosemental and emotional walls, I recognized that my competitorsChapter_6.indd   143Chapter_6.indd   1434/21/10   1:04:49 PM
that, if I kept going, I would be strides ahead of them. These werening moments of success and progress. It wasn’t dif cult,painful, or challenging when I was just running with the herd,just keeping up, but not really getting ahead. It’s not getting tothe wall that counts; it’s what you do after you hit it. Lou Holtz, the famous football coach, knew it was whatyou did after you did your best that created victories. In onegame his team was down 42-0 at halftime. During the half-time break, Lou showed his team a dramatic highlight reelof second efforts to block, tackle, and recover the ball. Hethen told the players that they were not on his team becausethey could give their all on every play; every player on everyteam does that. He said they were onhis team because of theirability to make that critical extra effort on each play. It’s theextra effort after you have done your best that is the differencemaker. His team went on to win the game in the second half.That is how you win.Muhammad Ali was one of the gr ghters of all time,not only because of his speed and agility, but also because ofhis strategy. On October 30, 1974, Ali regained his heavyweightchampionship, besting George Foreman in one of the biggestupsets in boxing history in the “Rumble in the Jungle.” Almostno one, not even Ali’s longtime supporter Howard Cosell,believed the former champion had a chance of winning. BothJoe Frazier and Ken Norton had beaten Ali previously, andGeorge Foreman had knocked both of them out in only thesecond round. Ali’s strategy? To take advantage of the youngerchampion’s weakness—his lack of staying power. Ali knew if heChapter_6.indd   144Chapter_6.indd   1444/21/10   1:04:52 PM4/21/10   1:04:52 PM145ACCELERATIONcould get Foreman to his wall, he could then take the advantage.This is when Ali came up with the tactic later termed “Rope-a-Dope.” Ali would lean on the ropes, shielding his face, whileForeman threw hundreds of punches over seven rounds. Bythe eighth round, Foreman was exhausted; he was at his wall.It was then that Ali dropped Foreman with a combination atcenter ring.Hitting the wall isn’t an obstacle; it’s an opportunity. DuringLance Armstrong’s second attempt at winning the Tour de France,rst bigclimb would be where Lance had experienced a devastating crashearlier that same year, giving him a concussion and breaking hisseventh lumbar vertebra during a wet day in the spring. Now itwas raining yet again. Instead of being concerned or hesitant, hesaid, “This is perfect attacking weather, mainly because I knowthe others don’t like it. I believe that nobody in the world is betterat suffering. It’s a good day for me.” He was right. Lance broughthome his second victory.When conditions are great, things are easy, there aren’t anydistractions, no one is interrupting, temptations aren’t luring,and nothing is disturbing your stride; that too is when mosteveryone else does great. It’s not until situations are dif cult,when problems come up and temptation is great, that you getto prove your worthiness for progress. As Jim Rohn would say,“Don’t wish it were easier; wish you were better.”When you hit the wall in your disciplines, routines, rhythms,and consistency, realize that’s when you are separating yourselffr nding your newpowerful, triumphant, and victorious self. Chapter_6.indd   145Chapter_6.indd   1454/21/10   1:04:56 PMI have an exciting opportunity for you. We’ve talked about 
how the simple disciplines and behaviors will compound overtime, delivering amazingly powerful results for you. What if youcould speed up the process and multiply your results? Wouldyou be interested? I want to show you how just a little bit moreeffort can add exponentially to your outcomes.Let’s say you’re weight training and your program calls for youto do twelve repetitions of a certain weight. Now, if you do thetwelve, you’r lling the expectation of your program. Greatjob. Stay consistent, and ultimately, you will see this disciplinecompound into powerful results for you. Yet, if you get to twelve,even if you’ve hit your max, and you push out another three tove reps, your impact on that set will be multiplied several times.You won’t just add a few reps to the aggregate of your workout.No. Those reps done after you hit your max willmultiply your results. You’ve just pushed through the wall of your max. Theprevious reps just got you there. The real growth happens withwhat you do after you’re at the wall.Arnold Schwarzenegger made famous a weight trainingmethod called “The Cheating Principle.” Arnold was a sticklerfor perfect technique. He contended that once you reachedyour maximum number of lifts in perfect form, adjustingyour wrists or leaning back to recruit other muscles to assistthe working muscles (cheating a little) would allow you tove or six more r cantly improvethe results of that set. (You can also achieve this by having aworkout partner who assists the last few reps you couldn’thave done on your own.)Chapter_6.indd   146Chapter_6.indd   1464/21/10   1:04:59 PM4/21/10   1:04:59 PM147ACCELERATIONIf you’re a runner, you know the experience. You get to thegoal you set for yourself that day, and you’re feeling the burn,you’re at your wall, but you go a little farther, a little longer. This“little longer” is really a massive expansion of your limits. Youhave multiplied the results of that single run.Take the magic penny we talked about in Chapter 1, theone that doubles in value each day, showing you the result ofsmall compounded actions. If you just doubled that penny oneextra time per week during those same thirty-one days, thecompounded penny would result in $171 million instead of $10million. Again, just extra effort in four days and the result wasmany times greater. That is how the math of doing just a little bitmore than expected works.Viewing yourself as your toughest competitor is one of the bestways to multiply your results. Go above and beyond when youhit the wall. Another way to multiply your results is pushing pastwhat other people expect of you—doing more than “enough.”Beat the Expectations Oprah is famous for using this principle—blasting beyondanyone’s expectations with her generosity and ability to live andwork in a BIG way. Do you remember how she launched hernineteenth season in September 2004? When it comes to Oprah,we know to expect some fanfare… but she blew everyone away.That season opener was all the media or anyone else talked aboutfor days afterward.Let’s go back in time for a minute…. The audience members were selected because their friends and family members hadChapter_6.indd   147Chapter_6.indd   1474/21/10   1:05:02 PM
Oprah opened the show by calling eleven people to the stage.She gave every one of them a car—a 2005 Pontiac G6. Then thereal surprise: She surpassed everyone’s expectations when shedistributed gift boxes to the rest of the audience saying one of theboxes contained a key to the twelfth car. But when the audiencemembers opened their boxes, every one of them had a set of keys.She screamed, “Everybody gets a car! Everybody gets a car!”While this might be her most famous example, Oprah continues to go beyond our expectations in most everythingshe does. In other segments, Oprah surprised a twenty-year-oldgirl who had spent years in foster care and homeless shelterswith a four-year college scholarship, a makeover and $10,000 inclothes. And, she gave a family with eight foster children whowere going to be kicked out of their house $130,000 to pay forand repair their home.Now you might be saying, yeah, but she’s Oprah, of course shecan do those things. But the truth is there are plenty of others innances and the fame—who could dothose things, but never venture into the realm of extraordinary.Oprah does. That’s what makes her Oprah. Take a lesson from her.You can do more than expected in every aspect of your life.When it was time to propose to my wife, Georgia, I could havedone what was expected and met with her father to ask for hisdaughter’s hand in marriage. Instead, I decided to pay greatrespect to her father by preparing my speech in Portuguese (I gotGeorgia’s sister to translate what I wanted to say). He understoodEnglish well enough, but wasn’t entirely comfortable with it.All the way up to Los Angeles from San Diego, I rehearsed theChapter_6.indd   148Chapter_6.indd   1484/21/10   1:05:04 PM4/21/10   1:05:04 PM149ACCELERATIONwords. I walked thr owers and treatsand asked her dad to join us in the living room. I then deliveredmy memorized speech. Thankfully, he said, “Yes!”But I didn’t stop there. On the way back, and over the nextcouple of days, I called each one of her FIVE brothers and alsoasked for their blessing to join the family. Some were easy toconvince, others proceeded to have me “earn it.” The pointis, she told me later that one of the most special aspects abouthow I proposed was how I had honored her dad and how I hadcalled every one of her brothers (and had her sister teach mePortuguese). That made the act extra special. The result of thatextra effort paid off exponentially.Stuart Johnson owns the parent company toSUCCESS,VideoPlus L.P. Stuart put a lot of money and a twenty-two-yearreputation on the line when he decided to acquireSUCCESSmagazine, SUCCESS.com and the other properties of SUCCESSMedia. During one of the most challenging economies in recenthistory, and as print publishing was being seen as unfavorable,the move in itself was bold and audacious, but then he did evenmore than could be expected. While the new business enterprisending its legs (translation: still operating in the red),and his primary business was taking a couple steps backwardlike the rest of the world during the economic tsunami of 2008and 2009, Stuart launched a nonpr t foundation dedicatedto kids. If he was going to make a commitment to helpingteach the fundamentals of personal development to the world,he wanted to be especially sure that information wouldreach teenagers. So he launched the SUCCESS Foundation(www.SUCCESSFoundation.org). He had the fundamentalChapter_6.indd   149Chapter_6.indd   1494/21/10   1:05:08 PM4/21/10   1:05:08 PM
called SUCCESS for Teensand is distributing it for freethroughresponsible partners and nonpr t organizations to helpnurture young minds.Stuart personally funded the administration and management  rst year, with the helpof a few good friends, he funded the distribution of more than1 million books. Today, that number is far greater and growing!Now, Stuart was already in for a heavy investment and bigrisk without the burdens of funding the new foundation. Butthe additional contribution and dedication to the foundationmultiplied the statement of his commitment several-fold topotential partners, the press, his peers, and his own staff. He wasdoing far more than expected—and it spoke volumes.Where in life can you do more than expected when you hit thewall? Or where can you go for “WOW”? It doesn’t take a lot moreeffort, but the little extra multiplies your results many times over.Whether you’re making calls, serving customers, recognizing yourteam, acknowledging your spouse, going for a run, bench pressing,planning a date night, sharing time with your kids, whatever…what’s the little extra you can do that exceeds expectations andaccelerates your results?Do the UnexpectedI’m a contrarian by nature, I know. Tell me what everyoneelse does, what’s the consensus and what’s popular, and I willtypically do the opposite. If everyone is zigging, I’m gonna zag.To me, what’s popular is average, it’s what’s common. CommonChapter_6.indd   150Chapter_6.indd   1504/21/10   1:05:10 PM4/21/10   1:05:10 PM151ACCELERATIONthings deliver common results. The most popular restaurantis McDonald’s, the most popular drink is Coca-Cola, the mostpopular beer is Budweiser, the most popular wine is Franzia(yeah, the stuff that comes in a box!). Consume those “popular”things, and you’ll be part of the common, average pack. But that’sordinary. There’s nothing wrong with ordinary. I just prefer toshoot for extraordinary.For instance, everyone sends Christmas cards. But, sinceeveryone does, it doesn’t really have much emotional impact, inmy opinion. So I choose to send Thanksgiving cards instead.How many Thanksgiving cards do you get? Exactly. It makesa statement. And instead of bulk-printed, computer-generated“best wishes” cards, I handwrite personal sentiments expressinghow grateful I am for my relationship with that person and whathe or she means to me—same effort, but a much greater impact.Richard Branson built his career on doing the unexpected. Ilove to watch him launch a new company. Each stunt is bolder,scarier, and mor yinga hot air balloon around the globe or driving a tank down FifthAvenue in New York to introduce Virgin Cola to the UnitedStates, Richard always delivers the unexpected. He could get bywith the expected press release, a press conference or two, andsome swanky party, and call it a day, but instead he goes for theastonishing. He probably spends as much as (and sometimeseven less than) other companies do to launch a product; he justdoes it in unexpected style. The wow-factor makes a statementand multiplies the impact of his efforts.More often than not, the extra effort doesn’t cost thatmuch more money or energy. When I was selling real estate,Chapter_6.indd   151Chapter_6.indd   1514/21/10   1:05:14 PM
up. Instead, I got in my car and showed up on their doorstepand hand-delivered a “SOLD” sign. “Take this,” I’d say whenthey’d open the door. “You’ll need it if you hire me to takeover this listing.” For the price it took to keep my gas tankfull, I immediately and exponentially increased my chance ofgetting the listing.Recently Alex, a friend of mine, was up for a big job. He lives innal twelvecandidates. They were going to interview local candidates in personand those out of the area via video conferencing. He called me,asking if I knew how to facilitate a Web camera video conference.“How badly do you want this job?” I asked him.“It’s my dream job,” Alex told me. “It’s everything I’ve spentve years preparing to do.”“Then get on a plane and show up in person.” I said.“No need,” Alex said, “They’r ying in the  nal three for alast interview.”nal three, youshould separate yourself by doing the unexpected. Fly across thecountry on a moment’s notice and show up in person. That’show you make a statement.” If I set my sights on something, I’m going to ensure successby going all in and all out. I launch what I call “shock andawe” campaigns. During this same job hunt I suggested Alexpull out all the stops—attack from every possible front and doit relentlessly.“Research all the decision makers,” I told him. “Find out theirinterests, hobbies, kids’ hobbies, spouses’ hobbies, neighbors’Chapter_6.indd   152Chapter_6.indd   1524/21/10   1:05:17 PM4/21/10   1:05:17 PM153ACCELERATIONhobbies, etc. Send them books, articles, gifts, and other resourcesthat you think they might like. ‘Is this over the top?’ Heck yes,that’s the point. They’ll know you’re trying to butter them up, butthey’ll appreciate your gumption and creativity—you’ll certainlyget their attention and most likely, their respect.” Then I continued:“Research all the people in the organization. Take that list and runit by your entire network to see if they know anyone who mightknow someone in this organization. Search every name againstyour LinkedIn database. Find a few people to connect with. Talkwith them and ask them to put in a good word for you. Sendthem gifts, notes, and other things, and ask them to hand-deliverthese things to the decision makers. Phone, e-mail, fax, text, tweet,Facebook, etc., them during the process. Could this be overlyaggressive? Heck, yes! But I have found that you may lose one outve for being too aggressive, but you get the other four!”By the way, Alex did not take my advice, and he did notnal three. I canunequivocally say he was a far better choice than the person theorganization hired, but Alex failed to make an impression, andit cost him his dream job.I’m on the board of a company that needed a congressmanto sign off on a piece of legislation that affected whether thiscompany could move forward on an important project. This guywasn’t budging, not because of the actual issue, but because of apolitical axe he was grinding against others who publicly favoredthe issue. Instead of making any more futile appeals to swayhim, I suggested we go above his head and talk to his boss—hiswife. We went through our network until one person led us tosomeone who was friends with his wife. We then waited for herChapter_6.indd   153Chapter_6.indd   1534/21/10   1:05:20 PM
friend introduce us. We explained our important case and cause,which was to build an after-school facility in an impoverishedneighborhood that would affect the lives of hundreds of childrenif her husband would support it. Needless to say, he signed on byTuesday that following week and the company got its project.In our attention-deficit, propaganda-saturated society,sometimes doing the unexpected is required to get your voiceheard. If you have a cause or ideal worthy of attention, do whatit takes, even the unexpected, to make your case heard. Add alittle audacity to your repertoire.Do Better Than Expected Invisible Children (www.InvisibleChildren.com), anothernonprofit for which I’m a board member, helps rescue andrecuperate children who have been abducted and made soldiersin northern Uganda and the Congo. To gain awareness for theircause, they staged a hundred-city event called “The Rescue,”where more than eight hundred thousand young people campedoutside until prominent leaders of the community came to“rescue them,” thus gaining their attention and support. Afterfour days, all but one city had been rescued, having people likeU.S. Sens. Ted Kennedy and John Kerry, Val Kilmer, Kristen Bell,and many others show up in ninety-nine other cities. The lastcity to get rescued was Chicago, and it required Oprah. After sixdays, Oprah was a no-show. On the fourth day, they organizeda march that went round and round her studios. The next daythey put on a singing and dancing presentation that went onChapter_6.indd   154Chapter_6.indd   1544/21/10   1:05:23 PM4/21/10   1:05:23 PM155ACCELERATIONall day and night. Then the sixth day, having endured harshweather and sleeping in the rain, the mor ve hundredparticipants surrounded her studio and stood in silence holdingsigns starting at 3:30 a.m. That morning Oprah walked out thedoors of Harpo Studios, spoke with the organization’s foundersand invited the entire group to participate in a live broadcastsegment that morning to her more than 20 million viewers. Thatattention got Invisible Children onLarry King Live and 232 other news outlets—to reach a total of more than 65 million people. Abill is currently moving through Congress supporting InvisibleChildren’s efforts to save these children. The organization hadalready pulled off more than expected with the Rescue event,but the little extra gumption and steadfastness to capture thatlast city (and the attention of Oprah), gained Invisible Childrenits biggest advocate to date, multiplying its results manytimes over.Find the line of expectation and then exceed it. Even when itcomes to the small stuff—or maybe especially then. WhateverI think the dress standard is going to be for any event, forexample, I always choose to go at least one step above it. WhenI am unsure of the attire, I always err on the side of dressingbetter than I suppose the occasion calls for. Simple, I know,but it’s just one way I try to meet my standard to always doand be better than expected.When I do keynotes for large companies, I spend a considerableamount of time preparing—learning about their organization,products, markets, and their expectations for my talk. My goalcantly surpass what they expect, and I dothis through tireless preparation. Doing better than expectedChapter_6.indd   155Chapter_6.indd   1554/21/10   1:05:26 PM
excellence multiplies your results in the marketplace manytimes over.I did some work with a CEO whose philosophy was to pay people, including his vendors and suppliers, a few days inadvance of the contract commitment. I was always blown awaywhen I received a check on the twenty-seventh of the monthfrom him for next month’s payment. When I asked him about it,he said the obvious, “It’s the same money, but the surprise andgood will it buys is immeasurable—why wouldn’t you?”This is one of the reasons why I admire Steve Jobs so much. Of allthe sensational people we’ve featured on the cover ofSUCCESS, Jobs is one of my favorites. Whatever your expectations areabout the next Apple product launch, Jobs always has a little (ora lot of) something extra to WOW you. In the grand scheme ofthings, it might be only a minor addition, but even so, it’s betterthan expected and multiplies the impression and response fromhis customers and deepens their loyalty. In a world where mostcantly accelerateyour results and stand out from the pack by doing better thanexpected. I like the boldness of what Robert Schuller told usin his SUCCESS feature (December 2008), “I say no idea isworthwhile if it doesn’t start with ‘Wow!’ ”Nordstrom is famous for this standard. When it comes tocustomer service, they always strive to do better than expected.Nordstrom has been known to take back an item that a customerbought more than a year ago, without a receipt, and in somecases, purchased at a different store! Why would they do that?Because they know exceeding expectations builds trust andChapter_6.indd   156Chapter_6.indd   1564/21/10   1:05:29 PM4/21/10   1:05:29 PM157ACCELERATIONcreates customer loyalty. As a result, they’ve developed anextraordinary reputation that continues to attract attention. Afterall, I’m reminding you of it here. Themultiplier keeps growing!I challenge you to adopt these philosophies in your own life—in your daily habits, disciplines and routines. Giving alittle more time, energy, or thought to your efforts won’t justimprove your results; it will multiply them. It takes very littleextra to be EXTRAordinary. In all areas of your life, look for themultiplier opportunities where you can go a little further, pushyourself a little harder, last a little longer, prepare a little better,and deliver a little bit more. Where can you do better and morethan expected? When can you do the totally unexpected? Findas many opportunities for “WOW,” and the level and speed ofyour accomplishments will astonish you… and everyone elsearound you.Chapter_6.indd   157Chapter_6.indd   1574/21/10   1:05:32 PM4/21/10   1:05:32 PM140THECOMPOUNDEFFECTPut the Compound Effect to Work for YouSummary Action Stepsuence the input of media and informationis having on your life. Determine what input you need toprotect your glass (mind) from and how you are going tokeep your glass (mind) r ushed with positive,uplifting, and supportive input. Download the Inputuence sheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.Evaluate your current associations. Who might you needto further limit your association? Who might you need tocompletely dissociate from? Strategize ways you will expandyour associations. Download the Association Assessmentsheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.Pick a peak-performance partner. Decide when, howregularly, and what you will hold each other accountableto, and what ideas you will expect the other to bring toeach conversation.Identify the three areas of your life you are most focusedon improving. Find and engage a mentor in each ofthose areas. Your mentors could be people who haveaccomplished what you wish to and with whom you havebrief conversations, or they could be experts who havewritten down their ideas in books or recorded their ideason CDs.Chapter_5.indd   140Chapter_5.indd   1404/21/10   1:04:34 PM4/21/10   1:04:34 PMSummary Action Steps When do you hit your moments of truth (e.g., making 
prospecting calls, exercising, communicating with yourspouse or kids)? Identify so you know when to pushthr nd new growth and where you can separateyourself from others and your old self.Find three areas in your life where you can you do “extra”(e.g., weight lifting reps, calls, recognition, sentiments ofappreciation, etc.).Identify three areas in your life where you can beatthe expectations. Where and how can you create“wow” moments?Identify three ways you can do the unexpected. Wherecan you differentiate from what is common, normal,or expected?Chapter_6.indd   158Chapter_6.indd   1584/21/10   1:05:34 PM4/21/10   1:05:34 PMCONCLUSION Learning without execution is useless. I didn’t write this bookfor my own amusement (this is hard work!) or even to simply“motivate” you. Motivation without action leads to self-delusion.As I said in the introduction, the Compound Effect and the results itwill manifest in your life are the real deal. Never again will you wishnd you. The Compound Effect is a toolthat, when combined with consistent, positive action, will make a realand lasting difference in your life. Let this book and its philosophybecome your guide. Let the ideas and success strategies sink in andproduce genuine, tangible, measurable outcomes for you. Wheneveryou realize small, seemingly innocuous poor habits have crept backinto your life, take out this book. Whenever you fall off the wagon ofconsistency, take out this book. Whenever you want to reignite yourmotivation and bolster your why-power, take out this book. Everytime you read this book, it entices Big Mo to pay a visit to your life.Let me share with you what motivates me. My core value incance. My desire is to make a positive difference inother people’s lives. So to accomplish my goals, I need you to accomplish your goals. It is your testimonial of life-changing Conclusion_.indd   159Conclusion_.indd   1594/21/10   1:05:42 PM
ve or ten yearsfrom now), to tell me about the incredible results you’ve realizedbecause of ideas you gained from this book. Only then will Iknow I have accomplished my goals, my objectives—that I amliving up to my core values in life.For you to get those results (and me, my testimonial), I knowyou have to take immediate action on your new insights andknowledge. Ideas uninvested are wasted. I don’t want that tohappen. It’s now time to act on your new convictions. You nowhave the power, and I expect you to seize it!Youareready to make dramatic improvements, right? Ofcourse, the obvious answer is, “YES!” But you know by now thatsaying you’re ready to make the necessary changes and actuallymaking them isn’t the same thing. To get different results, you’regoing to have to do things differently.No matter where you ar nd thisbook, if I could, I’d ask you these simple questions: “Look back onve years ago. Are younow where you’d thought you’dve years later? Have you kicked the bad habits you had vowedto kick? Are you in the shape you wanted to be? Do you have thecushy income, the enviable lifestyle, and the personal freedomyou expected? Do you have the vibrant health, abundant lovingrelationships, and the world-class skills you’d intended to haveby this point in your life?” If not, why? Simple—choices. It’s timeve years be acontinuum of the last. Choose to change your life, once and for all.ve years of your life fantastically differentve! My hope is that you’ve now removed yourConclusion_.indd   160Conclusion_.indd   1604/21/10   1:05:45 PMblinders. You know the truth about what it takes to earn success. 
You’ve got no more excuses. Like me, you too will refuse to bexenticements. You will stay focused on the simple but profounddisciplines that will lead you in the direction of your desires.You know that success isn’t easy or overnight. You understandthat when you’re committed to making moment-to-momentpositive choices (despite the lack of visible or instant results), theCompound Effectwill catapult you to heights that will astoundyou, bewilder your friends, family, and your competition. Whenyou hold true to your why-power and stay consistent with yournew behaviors and habits, momentum will carry you swiftlyforward. And then, together, with that momentum and consistent,ve years to bemore of the same. On the contrary, when you put the CompoundEffect to work for you, you will experience a success I’m willingto bet you currently cannot imagine! It will be incredible.I have one more valuable success principle to pass along to you.Whatever I want in life, I’ve found that the best way to get it is tofocus my ener dence,I look for ways to help someone else feel mor dent. If I wantto feel more hopeful, positive, and inspired, I try to infuse that insomeone else’s day. If I want more success for myself, the fastestway to get it is to go about helping someone else obtain it.The ripple effect of helping others and giving generously of yourtime and ener ciary of yourpersonal philanthropy.  rst simple and small step I’d likeyou to take in improving the trajectory of your life, I ask you to trythis philosophy in your own life. If you’ve found value in this book,Conclusion_.indd   161Conclusion_.indd   1614/21/10   1:05:48 PMwhom you care about and want greater success for. The recipients 
could be relatives, friends, team members, vendors, your favoritelocal small-business owner, or someone you just met and would liketo make a marked difference in their life. I know this sounds like itts me. It does. Remember, I am after the success testimonials.My goal is to make a difference in millions of people’s lives, but todo that, I need your help. But I promise you this: ultimately, it willts the most. Y nd theideas to gain gr rst step toward you exercisingthem in your own life. At the same time you could make a markeddifference in the life of someone else. This book could forever alterthe course of someone’s life… and it could be you who gives it tothem. W nd it.W ve people you will give a copy of this book to:1) __________________________________________2) __________________________________________3) __________________________________________4) __________________________________________5) __________________________________________Thank you for honoring me with your valuable time! I look forward to reading your success story.ToYOUR success! Darren HardyConclusion_.indd   162Conclusion_.indd   1624/22/10   4:13:10 PM4/22/10   4:13:10 PMRESOURCE GUIDEResources.indd   163Resources.indd   1634/21/10   1:07:48 PMincludes Darren Hardy™s top-
selling Design Your Best YearEver success planning system inworkbook format, as well as JimRohn™s extraordinary audio programs,Challenge to Succeed, The Art of Exceptional Living,and TakeCharge of Your Life.Design Your Best Year EverBased on 20-plus years of re˜ned study,practice, and execution, theDesign Your BestYear Everworkbook outlines the speci˜c planthat SUCCESS magazine Publisher DarrenHardy developed for himself to design,execute, stick to, and achieve big goals.165RESOURCE GUIDEYour monthly supply ofnew ideas, inspiration, andresources that will continueto give you the competitiveadvantage in life. Eachmagazine comes with aSUCCESSCD, featuring interviews with Darren Hardy andtoday™s greatest achievers and leading success experts.SUCCESS Book Summariesprovide a sneak peek at the contentof each featured book, with aspecial focus on chapters thatresonate with entrepreneurs andachievers. With a subscription to SUCCESSBook Summaries, you™ll receive summaries of threefeatured books in printed, audio, and PDF formats each month. Byreading and listening to the summaries, you™ll know whether thebooks are titles you™d like to add to your personal success library.Listen, read, and achievemore!Go towww.SUCCESS.comfor more information.166THECOMPOUNDEFFECTGratitude AssessmentDESIGNING THE BEST10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFE©2010BYDARREN HARDYDarrenHardy.SUCCESS.com7Three amazing people in my life are1.2.3.Three great things about my physical body are1.2.3.Three great things about my home and where I live are1.2.3.Three great things about where I work and what I do for a living are1.2.3.Three great gifts of unique talent and skill I have been given are1.2.3.Three great gifts of knowledge and experience I have been given are1.2.3.Three ways I have experienced ﬁluckﬂ in my life are1.2.3.Three ways in which my life is wealthy, abundant and prosperous are1.2.3.WORKSHEET NO. 2ŠGRATITUDEGet the complete, printable worksheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.167RESOURCE GUIDECore Values AssessmentDESIGNING THE BEST10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFEBYDARRENHARDYDarrenHardy.SUCCESS.com3WORKSHEET NO. 4ŠCORE VALUESYour values are your GPS navigation system for life. Getting them de˜ned and properly calibrated is one of themost important steps in redirecting your life toward your grandest vision. The below series of questions willhelp you evaluate and re˜ne what is truly important to you and what matters most in life. Answer each questionthoughtfully, and then I will help you select the top half-dozen values for your life.Who is the person I respect most in life? What are their core values?Who is my best friend, and what are his/her top three qualities?If I could have more of any one quality instantly, what would it be?What are three things I hate? (e.g., cruelty to animals, credit card companies, deforestation, etc.)Which three people in the world do I dislike the most and why?Which personality trait, attribute or quality do people compliment me on the most?What are the three most important values I want to pass on to my children?Getthecomplete,printableworksheetatwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.168THECOMPOUNDEFFECTLife Assessment1WORKSHEET #8 Œ LIFE ASSESSMENTFace the truthThere are no wrong answers, there is no grade, no rating, not even an interpretation of your responses otherthan your own thoughtful assessment. Be honest and truthful with yourself. Even when the truthful responseis a little embarrassing or painful, remember that no one else need ever see it and that you never succeed bydeceiving yourself.Rate the following on a scale of 1 to 5,1 being Least True and 5 being Most True:RELATIONSHIPS & FAMILYI spend at least 10 hours of focused time with my family each week.1  2  3  4  5I get together with friends at least once a week.1  2  3  4  5There is no one in my life that I haven™t completely forgiven.1  2  3  4  5I am actively engaged in learning how to be a better spouse, parent and/or friend.1  2  3  4  5I actively look for ways to support and help advance the success of my friends and family.1  2  3  4  5I take complete responsibility for all relationship con˜icts when they arise.1  2  3  4  5I easily trust those I live and work with.1  2  3  4  5I am 100% honest and open with all those I live and work with.1  2  3  4  5It is easy for me to commit to others and honor those commitments.1  2  3  4  5I recognize when I need support and am continually seeking help.1  2  3  4  5Total Score:PHYSICALI do strength training at least 3x a week.1  2  3  4  5I do cardiovascular exercise at least 3x a week.1  2  3  4  5I do stretching and/or yoga type exercise at least 3x a week.1  2  3  4  5During a typical day, I watch no more than 1 hour of  TV.1  2  3  4  5I eat breakfast (more than just co˚ee) every day.1  2  3  4  5I don™t eat fast food, ever.1  2  3  4  5I spend time outside for at least 30 minutes a day, every day.1  2  3  4  5I have undisturbed sleep for at least 8 hours each night.1  2  3  4  5I don™t drink more than 1 ca˚einated beverage per day.1  2  3  4  5I drink at least 8 glasses of water per day1  2  3  4  5Total Score:Getthecomplete,printableworksheetatwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.169RESOURCE GUIDEGet the complete, printable worksheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.Goal DesigningDESIGNING THE BEST10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFE©2010 BY DARREN HARDYDarrenHardy.SUCCESS.com1WORKSHEET #9 Œ The GRAND DesignGUIDELINESSubtle and seemingly inconsequential adjustments transform wishes and aspirations into results.1. Don™t Just Think ItŠINK ITThe weakest ink is stronger than the strongest mind. Unless you write down your goals, they are often lost in theshu˜e and excitement of new problems, challenges and decisions. Eliminate outside interruptions.ﬁReduce your plan to writing.... The moment you complete this, you will have de˜nitely given concrete form to the intangibledesire.ﬂŠNapoleon Hill2. Suspend RealityPretend it is only a game; play in fantasy for a while. Let the giant that lay dormant inside you out to play. If youhad every skill, resource or ability in the world, what would you do? What would you set out to accomplish? Don™t˚lter, qualify or judge.ﬁThe same thinking that has led you to where you are is not going to lead you to where you want to go.ﬂŠAlbertEinsteinRemember: Do not prejudge your ability or worthiness to have and achieve whatever your mind conceives. Letyour thoughts ˛ow.**UnderstandŠyou are not committing yourself to everything, or anything, you write down at ˚rst. Youare brainstorming, letting your imagination take a stroll. There will be time to separate out the outrageous andabsurd, but to start, just play with reckless abandon. If a genie popped out of a lamp and could grant you 10 wishesin every one of these categories, what would you write down? Go for it, play full out!3. Think BigGive yourself permission to dream big, risk big. What would you go for if you knew success was guaranteed? If youcould write the script for your character™s role in lifeŠand it could beanythingŠwhat role would you write foryourself? What™s your secret ambition? What have you always wanted to do, have, be, experience, but have beentoo afraid?What is your BHAG?Your Big Hairy Audacious Goal. What is that one thing that even the thought of it makesyour palms sweat a little?Expect little and, as a result, receive little.ﬁThe greater danger for most of us is not that our aim is too high and we miss it, but that it is too low and we hit it.ﬂ~Michelangelo170THECOMPOUNDEFFECTGet the complete, printable worksheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.DESIGNING THE BEST10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFE©2010 BY DARREN HARDYDarrenHardy.SUCCESS.com1WORKSHEET #10 Œ The MAGIC FACTORThe magic comes from becoming the person you need to be in order to attract the people or results you wish tomeet or achieve. Use the example below to determine the magic factor for achieving your goals.EXAMPLE:GOAL: Earn an extra $100,000 in income in 2010General description of WHO I NEED TO BECOME:discipline, commitment and achievement.and abundant referrals.New habits, disciplines or behaviors I need to START:something inspirational and instructional every dayclients, following news, blogs and updates of target accounts–Existing healthy habits, disciplines or behaviors I need to EXPAND:prompt, professional dress–Poor habits or behaviors I need to STOP:Top three modi˜cations and how I will implement it into my daily routine:HABIT, BEHAVIOR OR DISCIPLINEIMPLEMENTATION IN ROUTINESupportive associationsHabit Assessment171RESOURCE GUIDEWeekly Rhythm RegisterGet the complete, printable worksheet at www.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.DESIGNING THE BEST10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFE©2010 BY DARREN HARDYDarrenHardy.SUCCESS.com6ﬁThe rhythm of daily action aligned with your goals createsthe momentum that separates dreamers from super-achievers.ﬂ ŠDarren HardyWeeklyRhythm RegisterBehavior/ActionMonTuesWedsThursFriSatSunAchievedGoalNetTOTALCommitment is doing the thing you said you were going to dolong after the mood you said it in has left you.DateRange:Œ172THECOMPOUNDEFFECTInput In˜uencesGet the complete, printable worksheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.DESIGNING THE BEST10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFE©2010 BY DARREN HARDYDarrenHardy.SUCCESS.com1Worksheet # 15 Œ Your FUEL SystemAssessing Your InputLet™s look at all the potential ways you are feeding your mind less-than-supportive input. Just put a zero if youdon™t do a particular activity.TimeActivityPer DayPer WeekTotal per YearRead newspaperMorning TV shows or news programsNews radio in carEvening TV newsTV news during day (CNN, etc.)News on Web site homepagesRSS news feedsNews, gossip blogs, Web sites, readers, etc.News magazines (Newsweek,TIME, etc.)Gossip magazines (People,Vanity Fair, etc.)Other sources for news, gossip and ﬁsocialSitcom or other TV viewingLess-than-life-a˜rming movie viewingTotalList three ways you will cut or signi˜cantly limit your input of negative, fear mongering, worrisome, gossip orneedless social commentary input via newspapers, TV, radio, magazines, Web sites or otherwise.1.2.3.Your Plan to Feed Your MindWhat are the ways you will proactively feed your mind positive, inspirational, abundant, prosperity-minded ideas,information and input?1.2.3.4.5.173RESOURCE GUIDEAssociation EvaluatorGet the complete, printable worksheet atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.EDESTDESIGNING THE B 10 YEARS OF YOUR LIFE©2010 BY DARREN HARYDarrenHardy.SUCCSS.com1Worksheet # 14Your SUPPORT SystemŠAssociationsAssessing Your Current AssociationsThis is about the amount of TIME you spend with people outside of your immediate household (spouse and kids) and yourNamePhysicalFinancialBusiness/ProfessionMental/ AttitudeSpiritual/ LovingFamilyRelationshipsLifestyleAverage1.2.3.4.5.AverageDisassociationsName1.2.3.