CHAPTER 3HABITS 
A wise teacher was taking a stroll through the forest with a 
young pupil and stopped before a tiny tree. 
“Pull up that sapling,” the teacher instructed his pupil, pointing 
to a sprout just coming up from the earth. The youngster pulled 

 ngers. “Now pull up that one,” said the 

teacher, indicating a more established sapling that had grown 

to about knee high to the boy. With little effort, the lad yanked 

and the tree came up, roots and all. “And now, this one,” said 

the teacher, nodding toward a more well-developed evergreen 

that was as tall as the young pupil. With great effort, throwing 

all his weight and strength into the task, using sticks and stone 

he found to pry up the stubborn r nally got the 

tree loose. 
“Now,” the wise one said, “I’d like you to pull this one up.” 
The young boy followed the teacher’s gaze, which fell upon a 
Chapter_3.indd   55

Chapter_3.indd   554/21/10   1:00:14 PM

4/21/10   1:00:14 PM56THE COMPOUND EFFECTmighty oak so tall the boy could scarcely see the top. Knowing 

the great struggle he’d just had pulling up the much smaller tree, 

he simply told his teacher, “I am sorry, but I can’t.” 
“My son, you have just demonstrated the power that habits will have over your life!” the teacher exclaimed. “The older 
they are, the bigger they get, the deeper the roots grow, and the 

harder they are to uproot. Some get so big, with roots so deep, 

you might hesitate to even try.” 
Creatures of Habit Aristotle wrote, “We are what we repeatedly do.” Merriam-
W nes habit this way: “An acquired mode of behavior 

that has become nearly or completely involuntary.” 
There’s a story about a man riding a horse, galloping quickly. 
It appears that he’s going somewhere very important. A man 

standing along the roadside shouts, “Where are you going?” 

The rider replies, “I don’t know. Ask the horse!” This is the story 

of most people’s lives; they’re riding the horse of their habits, 

with no idea where they’re headed. It’s time to take control of 

the reins, and move your life in the direction of where you really 

want to go. If you’ve been living on autopilot and allowing your habits to run you, I want you to understand why. And I want you to 

let yourself off the hook. After all, you’re in good company. 

Psychological studies reveal that 95 percent of everything we 

feel, think, do, and achieve is a result of a learned habit! We’re 

born with instincts, of course, but no habits at all. We develop 

them over time. Beginning in childhood, we learned a series of Chapter_3.indd   56

Chapter_3.indd   564/21/10   1:00:17 PM

4/21/10   1:00:17 PM57HABITSconditioned responses that led us to react automatically (as in, 

without thinking) to most situations.  nite 
positives. If you had to consciously think about every step of 
each ordinary task—making breakfast, driving the kids to school, 

getting to work, and so on—your life would grind to a halt. You 

probably brush your teeth twice a day on autopilot. There’s 

no big philosophical debate; you just do it. You strap on your 

seatbelt the minute your butt hits the seat. No second thoughts. 
Our habits and routines allow us to use minimal conscious 

energy for everyday tasks. They help keep us sane and enable 

us to handle most situations reasonably well. And because we 

don’t have to think about the mundane, we can focus our mental 
energy on more creative and enriching thoughts. Habits can be 

helpful—as long as they’re good habits, that is. 
If you eat healthfully, you’ve likely built healthy habits around 
the food you buy and what you order at restaurants. If you’r t, 

it’s probably because you work out regularly. If you’re successful 

in a sales job, it’s probably because your habits of mental 

preparation and positive self-talk enable you to stay optimistic 

in the face of rejection. 
I’ve met and worked with many great achievers, CEOs, and 
“superstars,” and I can tell you they all share one common 
trait—they all have good habits. That’s not to say they don’t 
have bad habits; they do. But not many. A daily routine built on 

good habits is the difference that separates the most successful 

amongst us from everyone else. And doesn’t that make sense? 

From what we’ve already discussed, you know successful people 

aren’t necessarily more intelligent or more talented than anyone 
Chapter_3.indd   57

Chapter_3.indd   574/21/10   1:00:19 PM

4/21/10   1:00:19 PM58THE COMPOUND EFFECTelse. But their habits take them in the direction of becoming more 

informed, more knowledgeable, more competent, better skilled, 

and better prepared. 
My dad used Larry Bird as an example to teach me about 
habits when I was a kid. “Larry Legend” is known as one of the 
greatest professional basketball players. But he wasn’t known 

for being the most athletically talented player. Nobody would 

have described Larry as “graceful” on the basketball court. Yet, 

despite his limited natural athletic ability, he led the Boston 

Celtics to three world championships and remains one of the 

best players of all time. How did he do it? It was Larry’s habits—his relentless dedication to practice and to 
improve his game. Bird was one of the most consistent free-throw 

shooters in the history of the NBA. Growing up, his habit was to 

 ve hundred free-throw shots every morning before school. 

With that kind of discipline, Larry made the most of his God-given 

talents and kicked the butts of some of the most “gifted” players on 

the court. 
Like Larry Bird, you can condition your automatic and 
unconscious responses to be those of a developed champion. 

This chapter is about choosing to make up for what you lack in 
innate ability with discipline, hard work, and good habits. It’s 

about becoming a creature of champion habits. 
With enough practice and repetition, any behavior, good or 
bad, becomes automatic over time. That means that even though 

we developed most of our habits unconsciously (by modeling our 

parents, responding to environmental or cultural associations, 

or creating coping mechanisms), we can consciously decide to 

change them. It stands to reason that since you learned every habit 
Chapter_3.indd   58

Chapter_3.indd   584/21/10   1:00:22 PM

4/21/10   1:00:22 PM59HABITSyou have, you can also unlearn the ones that aren’t serving you 

well. Ready? Here goes… 
Start by Thinking Your Way Out of 

the Instant Gratiﬁ cation Trap 
W ng Pop-Tarts won’t slenderize 
our waistlines. We realize that logging three hours a night 

watching Dancing with the Stars and NCIS leaves us with three 
fewer hours to r c audio. We 

“get” that merely purchasing great running shoes doesn’t make 

us marathon-ready. We’re a “rational” species—at least that’s 

what we tell ourselves. So why are we so irrationally enslaved 

by so many bad habits? It’s because our need for immediate 

 cation can turn us into the most reactive, nonthinking 

animals around. 
If you took a bite of a Big Mac and immediately fell to the 
ground clutching your chest from a heart attack, you might not go 

back for that second bite. If your next puff of a cigarette instantly 

mutated your face into that of a weather ve-year-old, 

chances are you’d pass on that, too. If you failed to make that tenth 

call today and wer red and bankrupted, suddenly 

picking up the phone would be a no-brainer.  rst 

 fty pounds on your frame, saying 

“no thank you” to dessert would be the true piece of cake. 
The problem is that the payof cation derived 
from bad habits often far outweighs what’s going on in your 

rational mind concerning long-term consequences. Indulging 
in our bad habits doesn’t seem to have any negative effects at 
Chapter_3.indd   59

Chapter_3.indd   594/21/10   1:00:25 PM

4/21/10   1:00:25 PM60THE COMPOUND EFFECTall in the moment. You don’t have that heart attack, your face 

doesn’t shrivel up, you’re not standing in the unemployment 

line, and your thighs aren’t thunderous. But that doesn’t mean 

you haven’t activated the Compound Effect. 
It’s time to WAKE UP and realize that the habits you 
indulge in could be compounding your life into repeated 

disaster. The slightest adjustments to your daily routines 

can dramatically alter the outcomes in your life. Again, I’m 

not talking about quantum leaps of change or a complete 

overhaul of your personality, character, and life. Supersmall, 

seemingly inconsequential adjustments can and will 

revolutionize everything. 
The best illustration I can give you to emphasize the power of small adjustments is that of a plane traveling from Los Angeles to 

New York City. If the nose of the plane is pointed only 1 percent 

off course—almost an invisible adjustment when the plane’s 

sitting on the tarmac in Los Angeles—it will ultimately end up 

about 150 miles off course, arriving either upstate in Albany or 

in Dover, Delaware. Such is the case for your habits. A single 

poor habit, which doesn’t look like much in the moment, can 
ultimately lead you miles off course from the direction of your 

goals and the life you desire. See Figure 6.
Most people drift through life without devoting much 
conscious ener  cally what they want and 
what they need to do to take themselves there. I want to show you 

how to ignite your passion and help you aim your unstoppable 

creative power in the direction of your heart’s dreams and desires. 

Uprooting bad habits that have grown into mighty oaks is going 

to be arduous and dif cult; to see the process through will require 
Chapter_3.indd   60

Chapter_3.indd   604/21/10   1:00:27 PM

4/21/10   1:00:27 PM61HABITSFig. 6
New York City
Delaware
Albany
Los Angeles
something greater than even the most relentless determination—
willpower alone won’t cut it. 
Finding Your Mojo—Your Why-Power 
Assuming willpower is what you need to change your habits is akin to trying to keep a hungry grizzly bear out of your picnic 
basket by covering the it with a napkin. T ght the bear of your 

bad habits, you need something stronger. 
The power of small adjustments: a 1 percent change in course results 
in being 150 miles off course.Chapter_3.indd   61Chapter_3.indd   614/22/10   4:08:48 PM
4/22/10   4:08:48 PM62THE COMPOUND EFFECTWhen you’re having trouble doing the hard work of achieving 
your goals, it’s common to believe you simply lack willpower. 

I disagree. It’s not enough to choose to be successful. What’s 

going to keep you consistent with the new positive choices you 

need to make? What’s going to stop you from falling back into 

your mindless bad habits? What’s going to be different this 

time versus the times you’ve tried and failed before? As soon 

as you get the slightest bit uncomfortable, you’re going to be 

tempted to slide back into your old, comfortable routine. 
You’ve tried willpower before and it’s failed you. You’ve 
set resolutions and you’ve let them go. You thought you were 

going to lose all that weight last time. You thought you’d 

make all those sales calls last year. Let’s “stop the insanity” 

and do something different so you can get different and 

better results. 
Forget about willpower. It’s time for 
why-power. Your 
choices are only meaningful when you connect them to your 

desires and dreams. The wisest and most motivating choices 

are the ones aligned with that which you identify as your 

purpose, your core self, and your highest values. You’ve got 

to want something, and know why you want it, or you’ll end 
up giving up too easily. 
So, what is your why? You’ve got to have a reason if you want 
 cant improvements to your life. And to make you 

want to make the necessary changes, your why must be something that is fantastically motivating—to you. You’ve got to want to get 
up and go, go, go, go, go—for years! So, what is it that moves you 
the most? Identifying your why is critical. What motivates you is the ignition to your passion, the source for your enthusiasm, and 
Chapter_3.indd   62

Chapter_3.indd   624/21/10   1:00:33 PM

4/21/10   1:00:33 PM63HABITSthe fuel of your persistence. This is so important that I made it 
 rst book, 
Design Your Best Year Ever: A Proven 
Formula for Achieving BIG GOALS (SUCCESS Books, 2009). You 
MUST know your why. Why Everything’s Possible 
The power of your why is what gets you to stick through 
the grueling, mundane, and laborious. All of the 
hows will be 
meaningless until your whys are powerful enough. Until you’ve 
set your desire and motivation in place, you’ll abandon any 

new path you seek to better your life. If your why-power—your 
desire—isn’t great enough, if the fortitude of your commitment 

isn’t powerful enough, you’ll end up like every other person 

who makes a New Year’s resolution and gives up too quickly 

and reverts to sleepwalking through poor choices. Let me give 

you an analogy to help bring it home: 
If I were to put a ten-inch-wide, thirty-foot-long plank on the 
ground and say, “If you walk the length of the plank, I’ll give 

you twenty dollars,” would you do it? Of course, it’s an easy 
twenty bucks. But what if I took that same plank and made a 
roof-top “bridge” between two 100-story buildings? That same 

twenty dollars for walking the thirty-foot plank no longer looks 
desirable or even possible, does it? You’d look at me and say, 

“Not on your life.” See Figure 7.
However, if your child was on the opposite building, and 
 re, would you walk the length of the 

plank to save him? Without question and immediately—you’d 

do it, twenty dollars or not. 
Chapter_3.indd   63

Chapter_3.indd   634/21/10   1:00:36 PM

4/21/10   1:00:36 PM64THE COMPOUND EFFECTFig. 7
 rst time I asked you to cross that sky-
high plank, you said no way, yet, the second time you wouldn’t 
hesitate? The risks and the dangers are the same. What changed? 

Your 
why changed—your reason for wanting to do it. You see, 
when the reason is big enough, you will be willing to perform 

almost any how. To truly ignite your creative potential and inner drive, you 
have to look beyond the motivation of monetary and material 

goals. It’s not that those motivations are bad; in fact, they’re 
Is your why-power great enough?
Chapter_3.indd   64Chapter_3.indd   644/22/10   4:55:30 PM
4/22/10   4:55:30 PM65HABITSgreat. I’m a connoisseur of nice things. But material stuff 

can’t really recr ght. 

That passion has to come from a deeper place. And, even if 

you acquire the shiny object(s), you won’t capture the real 

 llment. In my interview with peak-

performance expert Anthony Robbins (
SUCCESS, January 
2009), he said: “I have seen business moguls achieve their 

ultimate goals, but still live in frustration, worry, and fear. 

What’s preventing these successful people from being happy? 

The answer is they have focused only on achievement and not 

 llment. Extraordinary accomplishment does not guarantee 

extraordinary joy, happiness, love, and a sense of meaning. 

These two skill sets feed off each other, and makes me believe 

 llment is failure.” 
Well said. That’s why it’s not enough to choose to be successful. 
Y nd your core motivation, to 

activate your superpower. Your why-power. 
Core Motivation 
The access point to your why-power is through your 
core 
values ne both who you are and what you stand 

for. Your core values are your internal compass, your guiding 

 lter through which 

you run all of life’s demands, requests, and temptations, making 

sure they’re leading you toward your intended destination. 

Getting your cor ned and properly calibrated is one 

of the most important steps in redirecting your life toward your 

grandest vision. Chapter_3.indd   65

Chapter_3.indd   654/21/10   1:00:41 PM

4/21/10   1:00:41 PM66
THE 
COMPOUND
 
EFFECT
If you haven’t alr ned your values, you may 
 nd yourself making choices that  ict with what you want. 
If, for example, honesty is a big thing for you, but you hang out 
with liars, ther  ict with 
your values, you’ll end up unhappy, frustrated, and despondent. 
In fact, psychologists tell us that nothing creates more stress 
than when our actions and behaviors aren’t congruent with 
our values. 
 ning your core values also helps make life simpler and 
more ef cient. Decision-making is also easier when you are 
certain of your core values. When faced with a choice, ask 
yourself, “Does this align with my core values?” If it does, do 
it. If not, don’t, and don’t look back. All fretting and indecision 
are eliminated. 
To identify your core values, use the Core Values 
Assessment sheet on page 167, or download at 
www.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.
Find Your Fight 
People are either motivated by something they want or 
something they don’t want. Love is a powerfully motivating 
force. But so is hate. Contrary to social correctness, it can be 
good to hate. Hate disease, hate injustice, hate ignorance, hate 
complacency, and so on. Sometimes identifying an enemy 
 re. Some of my greatest motivation, determination, 
Chapter_3.indd   66
Chapter_3.indd   66
4/21/10   1:00:44 PM
4/21/10   1:00:44 PM
67HABITS ght. 

In history, the most transformational stories and political 

revolutions came about as a r ghting an enemy. David 

had Goliath. America had the British. Luke had Darth Vader. 

Rocky had Apollo Creed. Twenty-somethings have “The Man.” 

Rush Limbaugh has the Liberals. Lance Armstrong has cancer. 

Apple has Microsoft. Microsoft has Apple. We could go on and 

on, but you get the point. Enemies give us a reason to stand tall with courage. Having 
 ght challenges your skills, your character, and your resolve. 

It forces you to assess and exercise your talents and abilities. 

W ght, we can become fat and lazy; we lose 

our strength and purpose. 
Some of my mentorship clients worry that their why-power derives from less-than-noble goals. They feel guilty for wanting 

to prove the naysayers wrong. Or wanting to get back at the 

person who said they’d never amount to anything, or beat the 
 nally one-up a sibling who always dominated 

them. But, really, it doesn’t matter what the motivation is (as 

long as it is legal and moral); you don’t have to be motivated 
for great humanitarian reasons. What matters is that you feel 

fully motivated. Sometimes that motivation can help you use 
a powerfully negative emotion or experience to create an even 

more powerful and successful end. 
This is certainly true of one of history’s most celebrated football 
coaches, Pete Carroll. When we featured Carroll in 
SUCCESS magazine in September of 2008, he explained his early motivation 

like this: “When I grew up, I was a little dink. I couldn’t do much 

because I was just too small. It took me a couple years to get in a 
Chapter_3.indd   67

Chapter_3.indd   674/21/10   1:00:46 PM

4/21/10   1:00:46 PM68THE COMPOUND EFFECTplace where I could be competitive. All that time, I was living with 

 ght to prove it. I 

was frustrated because I knew I could be special.” 
Carr ght ultimately brought out his greatness. 

Our March 2010 issue of 
SUCCESS magazine featured an 
interview with acclaimed actor Anthony Hopkins. I was surprised 

to learn that his extraordinary talent and determination blossomed 

from anger. Hopkins admitted to being a horrible student, burdened 

 cit hyperactivity disorder before such 

diagnoses existed. He was shackled with the label “problem child.” 
“I was a source of worry for my parents,” Hopkins revealed. 
“I had no apparent future because schooling and education were 

important, but I didn’t seem to have the ability to grasp what was 
being taught to me. My cousins were all brilliant; I felt resentful 

and rejected by a whole society and was very depressed.” 
Hopkins harnessed his anger.  rst it propelled him to 
 ght to achieve success outside of academics or athletics. He 

discovered he had a glimmer of talent in acting. So, he used 

his anger toward the belittling labels he’d been given to fuel 

his commitment to the craft of acting. Today, Hopkins is 

considered one of the greatest actors alive. As a result of the 

fame and fortune he’s acquired, Hopkins has been able to help 

 ght to recover from substance abuse, 

in addition to supporting important environmental work. 

Though, initially,  it wasn’t grounded in a “noble” cause, his 

 ght was clearly worthwhile. 
We can all make powerful choices. We can all take back control 
by not blaming chance, fate, or anyone else for our outcomes. 
It’s within our ability to cause everything to change. Rather than Chapter_3.indd   68

Chapter_3.indd   684/21/10   1:00:49 PM

4/21/10   1:00:49 PM69HABITSletting past hurtful experiences sap our energy and sabotage our 

success, we can use them to fuel positive, constructive change. 
Goals As I mentioned before, the Compound Effect is always 
working, and it will always take you somewhere. The question 

is, where? You can harness this relentless force and have it carry 

you to new heights. But you must know where you want to go. 

What goals, dreams, and destinations do you desire? 
When I attended the funeral of Paul J. Meyer, another mentor 
of mine, I was reminded of the richness and diversity of his life. 

He achieved, experienced, and contributed more than dozens of 

people combined. His obituary made me reassess the quantity 

and size of the goals I set for myself. If Paul were here, he would 

tell us, “If you are not making the progress that you would like to 

make and are capable of making, it is simply because your goals 

ar ned.” One of Paul’s most memorable quotes 

reminds us of the importance of goals: “Whatever you vividly 

imagine, ardently desire, sincerely believe, and enthusiastically 

act upon... must inevitably come to pass!” The one skill most responsible for the abundance in my life 
is learning how to effectively set and achieve goals. Something 

almost magical happens when you organize and focus your 

cr ned target. I’ve seen this time and 

again: the highest achievers in the world have all succeeded 
because they mapped out their visions. The person who has a 
clear, compelling, and white-hot burning why will always defeat 

even the best of the best at doing the how. Chapter_3.indd   69

Chapter_3.indd   694/21/10   1:00:52 PM

4/21/10   1:00:52 PM70
THE 
COMPOUND
 
EFFECT
To ﬁ gure out where you might need to add to or adjust 
your goals, take the Life Assessment on page 168, or 
download at 
w
w
w
.
T
h
e
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
E
f
f
e
c
t
.
c
o
m
/
f
r
e
e
. 
How Goal Setting 
Actually
 Works: 
The Mystery ‘Secret’ Revealed 
You only see, experience, and get what you look for. If you 
don’t know what to look for, you certainly won’t get it. By our 
very nature, we are goal-seeking creatures. Our brain is always 
trying to align our outer world with what we’re seeing and 
expecting in our inner world. So, when you instruct your brain 
to look for the things you want, you will begin to see them. In 
fact, the object of your desire has probably always existed around 
you, but your mind and eyes weren’t open to “seeing” it. 
In reality, this is how the 
Law of Attraction
 really works. It is 
not the mysterious, esoteric voodoo it sometimes sounds like. 
It’s far simpler and more practical than that. 
We are bombarded with billions of sensory (visual, audio, 
physical) bites of information each day. To keep ourselves from 
going insane, we ignore 99.9 percent of them, only really seeing, 
hearing, or experiencing those upon which our mind focuses. 
This is why, when you “think” something, it appears that you are 
miraculously drawing it into your life. In reality, you’re now just 
seeing what was already there. You are truly “attracting” it into 
your life. It wasn’t there before or accessible to you until your 
thoughts focused and directed your mind to see it. 
Chapter_3.indd   70
Chapter_3.indd   70
4/21/10   1:00:54 PM
4/21/10   1:00:54 PM
71HABITSMake sense? This isn’t mysterious at all; it’s, in fact, quite logical. Now, with this new perception, whatever your mind is 

thinking internally is what it will focus on and all of a sudden 
“see” within that 99.9 percent of remaining space. 
Here’s a well-worn example (because it’s so true!): In shopping 
for or buying a new car, you suddenly start to see that model and 

make everywhere, right? It seems like there are tons of them on 

the streets all of a sudden when they weren’t there yesterday. But 

is that realistic? Of course not. They were there all along, but you 

weren’t paying attention to them. Thus, they didn’t really “exist” 

to you until you gave them your attention.  ne your goals, you give your brain something 
new to look for and focus on. It’s as if you’re giving your mind a 

new set of eyes from which to see all the people, circumstances, 

conversations, resources, ideas, and creativity surrounding you. 

With this new perspective (an inner itinerary), your mind proceeds 

to match up on the outside what you want most on the inside—
your goal. It’s that simple. The difference in how you experience 

the world and draw ideas, people, and opportunities into your 
 ned your goals is profound. 
In one of my interviews with Brian Tracy, he put it this way: 
“Top people have very clear goals. They know who they are 

and they know what they want. They write it down and they 
make plans for its accomplishment. Unsuccessful people carry 
their goals around in their head like marbles rattling around in a 

can, and we say a goal that is not in writing is merely a fantasy. 

And everybody has fantasies, but those fantasies are like bullets 

with no powder in the cartridge. People go through life shooting 

blanks without written goals—and that’s the starting point.” Chapter_3.indd   71

Chapter_3.indd   714/21/10   1:00:57 PM

4/21/10   1:00:57 PM72
THE 
COMPOUND
 
EFFECT
I suggest that you take some time 
today
 to make a list of your 
most important goals. I recommend considering goals in all 
 nances. Be wary 
of the high price of putting too much focus on any single aspect 
of your life, to the exclusion of everything else. Go for whole-
life success—balance in all the aspects of life that are important 
 nances, health and well-being, spirituality, 
family and relationships, and lifestyle. 
To help you set speciﬁ c and meaningful goals, 
refer to the Goal Designing sheet on page 169, or 
download at 
w
w
w
.
T
h
e
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
E
f
f
e
c
t
.
c
o
m
/
f
r
e
e
. 
Who You Have to Become 
When most people set out to achieve new goals, they ask, “Okay, 
I have my goal; now what do I need to 
do
 to get it?” It’s not a bad 
 rst question that needs to be addressed 
either. The question we should be asking ourselves is: “Who do I need 
to become?” You probably know some people who seem to do all the 
right things, but still don’t produce the results they want, right? Why 
not? One thing Jim Rohn taught me is: “If you want to have more, 
you have to 
become
 more. Success is not something you pursue. What 
 ies. 
Success is something you attract by the person you become.” 
When I understood that philosophy, wow! It revolutionized 
my life and personal growth. When I was single and ready 
Chapter_3.indd   72
Chapter_3.indd   72
4/21/10   1:01:00 PM
4/21/10   1:01:00 PM
73
HABITS
 nd my mate and get married, I made a long list of traits 
I desir lled more than 
forty pages of a journal, front and back, describing her in great 
detail—her personality, character, key attributes, attitudes, and 
philosophies about life, even what kind of family she’d come 
from, including her culture and physical makeup, down to the 
texture of her hair. I wrote in depth what our life would be 
like and what we’d do together. If I had then asked, “What do 
I have to 
do
 nd and get this girl?” I might still be on that 
 y chase. Instead, I looked back at the list and considered 
whether or not I embodied those same attributes myself. Did I 
have the very qualities I was expecting in her? I asked myself, 
“What kind of a man would a woman like this be looking 
for? Who do I need to become to be attractive to a woman of 
this substance?” 
 lled forty more pages describing all the attributes, qualities, 
behaviors, attitudes, and characteristics I needed to become myself. 
Then I went to work on becoming and achieving those qualities. 
Guess what? It worked! As if she were peeled off the pages of my 
journal and appeared in front of me, my wife, Georgia, is exactly 
what I described and asked for, in almost eerie detail. The key 
was my getting clear on who I’d have to be to attract and keep a 
woman of her quality, and then doing the work to achieve that. 
To identify bad habits and needed new habits essential 
to becoming and achieving what you want, complete 
the Habit Assessment sheet on page 170, or download 
at 
w
w
w
.
T
h
e
C
o
m
p
o
u
n
d
E
f
f
e
c
t
.
c
o
m
/
f
r
e
e
. 
Chapter_3.indd   73
Chapter_3.indd   73
4/21/10   1:01:03 PM
4/21/10   1:01:03 PM
74THE COMPOUND EFFECTBehave Yourself 
Alright, let’s map out your process for achieving the goals 
you’ve decided upon. This is the doing process—or, in some cases, 
the STOP-doing
 process. 
What stands between you and your goal is your behavior. Do you need to stop doing anything so the Compound Effect isn’t 

taking you into a downward spiral? Similarly, what do you need 

to start doing to change your trajectory so that it’s headed in 
 cial direction? In other words, what habits and 

behaviors do you need to subtract from and add to your life? 
Your life comes down to this formula: 

YOU 
 CHOICE  +  BEHAVIOR  +  HABIT  +  COMPOUNDED  =  GOALS
     
 (decision)         (action)      (repeated action)         (time) 
 gure out which behaviors are 
blocking the path that leads to your goal, and which behaviors 
will help you accomplish your goal. You may think you’ve got a handle on all your bad habits, but 
I’d bet good money you’re wrong. Again, that’s why tracking is so 

effective. I mean, honestly, do you know how many hours of TV you 

really watch every day? How many hours do you spend tuned to 

news channels or keeping up with the goals and accomplishments 

of others on the sports or style networks? Do you know how many 

cans of soda you drink? Or how many hours you spend doing 

nonessential “work” on the computer (Facebook, reading online 

gossip, etc.)? As I emphasized in the previous chapter rst 

job is to become aware of how you’re behaving. Where have you 

fallen asleep on the job and developed an unconscious bad habit 

that’s leading you astray? 
Chapter_3.indd   74

Chapter_3.indd   744/21/10   1:01:05 PM

4/21/10   1:01:05 PM75HABITSNot long ago, a successful executive with whom I serve on 
a nonprofit board hired me to mentor him on improving his 

productivity. He was doing well, but knew he could optimize his time 

and output further with some coaching. I had him track his activities 

for a week, and I noticed something I see too often: He spent an 

incredible amount of time r ve minutes in 

the morning reading the newspaper, another thirty minutes listening 

to news on his morning commute, and an equal amount of time 

tuning in again on his drive back home. During his workday, he’d 

check Yahoo! News several times, spending at least twenty minutes 

 fteen minutes of the 

local news while greeting his family. Then he’d catch up on thirty 

minutes of sports news and thirty minutes of the 10 o’clock news 

before going to bed. In total, he was spending 3.5 hours with the 

news each day! This man wasn’t an economist or a commodities 

trader, or in any profession that lived or died by the latest news. The 

time he spent with the paper and news programs on radio and TV 

greatly exceeded what he needed to be a knowledgeable voter and 

contributing member of society, or even to enhance his own personal 

interests. In fact, he was getting very little valuable information 

through his programming choices—or, rather, his 
lack of choices. 
So why did he spend nearly four hours a day consuming it? It was 

a habit. 
I suggested he keep his TV and radio off, cancel his newspaper 
subscription, and set up an RSS feeder so he could select and 
receive only the news he deemed important for his business and 

personal interests. Doing so immediately cleared out 95 percent 

of the mind-cluttering and time-sucking noise. He could now 
review all that mattered to him in less than twenty minutes a 
Chapter_3.indd   75

Chapter_3.indd   754/21/10   1:01:08 PM

4/21/10   1:01:08 PM76THE COMPOUND EFFECTday ve minutes in the morning (his commute 

time), and that hour in the evening for productive activities: 

exercise, listening to instructional and inspirational material, 

reading, planning, preparing, and spending quality time with his 

family. He tells me he’s never felt less stressed (constant negative 

news has a tendency to make you anxious), and more inspired 

and focused than he does now. One small, simple change in 

habit, one giant leap forward in balance and productivity! 
Okay, now it’s your turn. Get out your little notebook and write 
out your top three goals. Now make a list of the bad habits that might 

be sabotaging your progress in each area. 
Write down every one
. Habits and behaviors never lie. If there’s a discrepancy between 
what you say and what you do, I’m going to believe what you do every time. If you tell me you want to be healthy, but you’ve got 

 ngers, I’m believing the Doritos. If you say 

self-improvement is a priority, but you spend more time with your 

Xbox than at the library, I’m believing the Xbox. If you say you’re 

a dedicated professional, but you show up late and unprepared, 

your behavior rats you out every time. You say your family is your 

top priority, but if they don’t appear on your busy calendar, they 

aren’t, really. Look at the list of bad habits you just made. That’s 

the truth about who you are. Now you get to decide whether that’s 

okay, or if you want to change. 
Next, add to that list all the habits you need to adopt that, practiced and compounded over time, will result in you 

gloriously achieving your goals. Making this list isn’t about wasting energy by getting 
judgmental and regretful. It’s about taking a clear-headed look 

at what you want to improve. I’m not going to leave you there, 
Chapter_3.indd   76

Chapter_3.indd   764/21/10   1:01:10 PM

4/21/10   1:01:10 PM77HABITShowever. Let’s uproot those sabotaging bad habits and plant 

new, positive, and healthy ones in their place. 
Game Changers: Five Strategies 
for Eliminating Bad Habits Your habits are learned; therefore, they can be unlearned. If 
you want to sail your life in a new dir rst 

pick up the anchors of bad habits that have been weighing you 
down. The key is to make your why-power so strong that it 

overwhelms your ur cation. And for that, 

you need a new game plan. The following are my all-time 

favorite game changers: 1. Identify Your Triggers

Look at your list of bad habits. For each one you’ve written down, identify what triggers it. Figure out what I call “The Big 

4’s”—the “who,” the “what,” the “where,” and the “when” 

underlying each bad behavior. For example: 
Are you more likely to drink too much when you’re with 
• certain people? 
Is there a particular time of day when you just 
• have to have something sweet? 
What emotions tend to provoke your worst habits—stress, 
• fatigue, anger, nervousness, boredom? 

When do you experience those emotions? Who are you 
• with, where are you, or what are you doing? 

What situations prompt your bad habits to surface—
• getting in your car, the time before performance reviews, 
Chapter_3.indd   77

Chapter_3.indd   774/21/10   1:01:13 PM

4/21/10   1:01:13 PM78THE COMPOUND EFFECTvisits with your in-laws? Conferences? Social settings? 

Feeling physically insecure? Deadlines? 

Take a closer look at your routines. What do you typically 
• say when you wake up? When you’re on a coffee or lunch 

break? When you’ve gotten home from a long day? 
Again, get out your notebook or use the Bad Habit Killer 
Worksheet here (which you can also download for free at 

www.TheCompoundEffect.com/free) and write down your triggers. 

This simple action alone increases your awareness exponentially. But, 

of course, this isn’t the whole enchilada, because as we’ve discussed, 

increasing your awareness of a bad habit isn’t enough to break it. 
2. Clean House 
Get to scrubbin’.  guratively. If you 
want to stop drinking alcohol, remove every drop of it from your 

house (and your vacation house, if you have one). Get rid of the 

glasses, any fancy utensils or doo-dads you use when you drink, 

and those decorative olives, too. If you want to stop drinking coffee, 

heave the coffee maker, and give that bag of gourmet grounds to 

a sleepy neighbor. If you’re trying to curb your spending, take an 

evening and cancel every catalogue or retail of ies in through 

your mailbox or your inbox, so you won’t even need to muster the 

discipline to walk it from the front door to the recycle bin. If you 

want to eat more healthfully, clean your cupboards of all the crap, 

stop buying the junk food—and stop buying into the argument that 

it’s “not fair” to deny the other people in your family junk food just 

because you don’t want it in your life. Trust me; everyone in your 

family is better off without it. Don’t bring it into the house, period. 

Get rid of whatever enables your bad habits. 
Chapter_3.indd   78

Chapter_3.indd   784/21/10   1:01:16 PM

4/21/10   1:01:16 PM79HABITS3. Swap It 
Look again at your list of bad habits. How can you alter 
them so that they’re not as harmful? Can you replace them 

with healthier habits or drop-kick them altogether? As in, 

for good. 
Anyone who knows me knows that I love something sweet after a meal. If there is ice cream in the house, the something 

 xings 

(1,255 calories). Instead, I replace that bad habit with two 

Hershey’s Kisses (50 calories). I’m still able to satisfy the sweet 
tooth without having to spend the extra hour on the treadmill 

just to get back to even.  My sister-in-law started a habit of eating crunchy and salty 
junk food when she watched TV. She’d crunch through a whole 

bag of tortilla chips with little actual awareness. Then she realized 

that what she really enjoyed was the crunchy sensation in her 

mouth. She decided to replace her bad habit with crunching on 

carrot and celery sticks, and raw broccoli spears. She got the 

same joyful sensation, and her FDA-recommended vegetable 

servings at the same time. A guy who used to work for me had a habit of drinking eight 
to ten Diet Cokes a day (that’s a BAD habit!). I suggested he 
replace them with low-sodium, carbonated water, adding fresh 

lemon, lime, or oranges. He did this for about a month before 

realizing he didn’t need the carbonation at all, and switched to 

just plain water. 
Play with this, and see what behaviors you can replace, delete, 
or swap out. Chapter_3.indd   79

Chapter_3.indd   794/21/10   1:01:18 PM

4/21/10   1:01:18 PM80THE COMPOUND EFFECT4. Ease In 
 c Ocean. Whenever I get in the water, I get 
 rst, then walk in up to my knees, then 

it’s my waist and chest, before taking the plunge. Some people 

just run and dive in and get it over with—good for them. Not 

me. I like to ease my way in (probably residual trauma from my 

childhood, as you’ll see in the next strategy). For some of your 
long-standing and deep-rooted habits, it may be more effective 

to take small steps to ease into unwinding them. You may have 

spent decades repeating, cementing, and fortifying those habits, 

so it can be wise to give yourself some time to unravel them, one 
step at a time. A few years, ago my wife’s doctor required she cut out caffeine 
from her diet for several months. We both 
love our coffee, so if 
she was going to have to suffer, I decided it was only fair that we 

do it together. W rst went to 50/50—50 percent decaffeinated 

and 50 percent regular for a week. Then 100 percent decaf for 

another week. Then Earl Grey decaf tea for a week, followed by 

decaf green tea. It took us a month to get there, but we didn’t 

suffer even a moment of caffeine withdrawal—no headaches, no 

sleepiness, no brain fog, no nothing. However, if we had gone 

cold turkey… well, I shiver at the thought. 5. Or Jump In 
Not everyone is wired the same way. Some researchers have 
found that it can be paradoxically easier for people to make 
lifestyle changes if they change a great many bad habits at once. 

For example, pioneering cardiologist Dr. Dean Ornish found 

he could reverse people’s advanced heart disease—without 
Chapter_3.indd   80

Chapter_3.indd   804/21/10   1:01:21 PM

4/21/10   1:01:21 PM81HABITSmedication or surgery—with dramatic lifestyle changes. He 

discovered they often found it easier to say goodbye to almost 

all their bad habits at once. He enrolled them in a training 

session where he substituted a very low-fat diet for their fat- and 

cholesterol-rich fare. The program included exercise—getting 

them off their couches and walking or jogging—as well as 

stress-reduction techniques, and other heart-healthy habits. 

Amazingly, in less than a month, these patients learned to let 

go of a lifetime of bad habits and embrace new ones—and they 
 ts after a year as a 

result. Personally nd this to be the exception, not the rule, but 

 gure out the strategy that works best for you. 
When I was a kid, my family camped at a little-known spot 
called Lake Rollins. The lake, situated not far from the Sierras 

in Northern California, is fed from glaciers that melt from atop 

the mountains of Lake Tahoe. The water’s ridiculously cold. 

Every day we were there, my dad insisted that I water ski in 

the polar pond. All day I would be quietly anxious about the 

dreaded call to go in. I loved to water ski; I just hated getting 
in the water. A ict of interest, because of course, there 

was no separating one from the other. 
Dad made sure that I never missed my turn, sometimes 
by actually physically throwing me in. After a dozen or so 

excruciating seconds of near-hypothermia, I always found the 

water refreshing and rejuvenating. My anticipation of getting 

in the water was actually worse than the reality of just jumping 

in. Once my body acclimated, water skiing was a blast. And, 

yet, I went through this cycle of dread and relief each and 

every time. 
Chapter_3.indd   81

Chapter_3.indd   814/21/10   1:01:24 PM

4/21/10   1:01:24 PM82THE COMPOUND EFFECTThat experience isn’t unlike that of suddenly dropping or 
changing a bad habit. For a short while it can feel excruciating, 

or at least quite uncomfortable. But just as the body adjusts to a 
changing environment through a process called homeostasis, we 

have a similar homeostatic ability to adjust to unfamiliar behavior 
changes. And usually, we can regulate ourselves physiologically 

and psychologically to the new circumstances quite quickly. 
Sometimes wading in just won’t do. Sometimes you really do 
have to jump in. I want you to ask yourself now, “Where can I start 

slow and hold myself accountable?” And, “Where do I need to take 

that bigger leap? Where have I been avoiding pain or discomfort, 

when I know deep down that I’ll adapt in no time if I just go for it?” 
One of my former partners has a brother who was a beer-
guzzling, bar-brawling, life-of-the-party alcoholic. He drank at 

lunch, with dinner, after dinner, and all weekend long. One day 

he was at a wedding for a former college roommate when he 

saw his friend’s brother, who was ten years older than both of 

them, but looked ten years younger! He watched the man dance, 
laugh, and play during the wedding, exuding a vitality he hadn’t 
felt in many years. He made a decision on the spot that he would 
never touch a drop of alcohol again. Cold turkey, that was it, 

never again. And he hasn’t in more than six years. 
When it comes to changing bad habits at home, I’m a toe dipper. 
But in my pr nd that taking the big plunge is far 

more effective. Whether committing to a new business or dealing 

with potential new clients, partners, or investors, toe dipping 

usually doesn’t cut it. Each time, I think of Lake Rollins and know 

 rst, but I remember that within little time, it 

will be exhilarating, and well worth the temporary discomfort. 
Chapter_3.indd   82

Chapter_3.indd   824/21/10   1:01:27 PM

4/21/10   1:01:27 PM83HABITSRun a Vice Check I’m not suggesting you cut out every “bad” thing in your life. Most everything is good in moderation. But, how can you 
tell whether a bad habit is becoming the boss of you? I believe 
in testing my vices. Every so often I go on a “vice fast.” I pick 
one vice, and check to be sure I’m still the alpha dog in our 

relationship. My vices are coffee, ice cream, wine, and movies. I 

already told you about my ice cream obsession. When it comes to 

wine, I want to be sure I’m enjoying a glass and celebrating the 

day, not drowning a bad mood. 
About every three months, I pick one vice and abstain 
for thirty days (this probably stems from my Catholic Lent 

upbringing). I love proving to myself that I’m still in charge. 

Try this yourself. Pick a vice—something you do in moderation, 

but you know doesn’t contribute to your highest good—and 

take yourself on a thirty-day wagon r nd it seriously 

dif cult to abstain for those thirty days, you may have found a 

habit worth cutting out of your life. 
Game Changers: Seven Techniques 

for Installing Good Habits Now that we have helped you eliminate the bad habits that are 
taking you in the wrong direction, we need to create new choices, 

 nally take you in the 

direction of your grandest desires. Eliminating a bad habit means 

removing something from your routine. Installing a new, more 

productive habit requires an entirely different skill set. You’re 

planting the tree, watering it, fertilizing it, and making sure it’s 
Chapter_3.indd   83

Chapter_3.indd   834/21/10   1:01:30 PM

4/21/10   1:01:30 PM84THE COMPOUND EFFECTproperly rooted. Doing so takes effort, time, and practice. Here are 

my favorite techniques for putting good habits in place. 
Leadership expert John C. Maxwell said, “You will never 
change your life until you change something you do daily. 

The secret of your success is found in your daily routine.” 

According to research, it takes three hundred instances of 

positive reinforcement to turn a new habit into an unconscious 

practice—that’s almost a year of daily practice! Fortunately, 

as we talked about earlier, we know we’ve got a much better 

chance of cementing a new habit into our lives after three weeks 

of diligent focus. That means that if we bring special attention to 
a new habit daily rst three weeks, we have a far better 
chance of making it a lifelong practice. The truth is, you can change a habit in a second, or you can 
still be trying to br rst time you 

touched a hot stove, you instantly knew you’d never make that a 
habit! The shock and pain was so intense that it forever changed 

your awareness; you knew you’d be conscious for the rest of 

your life around hot stoves. 
The key is staying aware. If you really want to maintain a 
good habit, make sure you pay attention to it at least once a day, 

and you’re far more likely to succeed. 
1. Set Yourself Up to Succeed 

Any new habit has to work inside your life and lifestyle. If you join 
a gym that’s thirty miles away, you won’t go. If you’re a night owl 

but the gym closes at 6 p.m., it won’t work for you. Your gym must 

 t into your schedule. If you want to 

lose weight and eat healthier, make sure your fridge and pantry are 
Chapter_3.indd   84

Chapter_3.indd   844/21/10   1:01:33 PM

4/21/10   1:01:33 PM85HABITSstocked with healthy options. Want to make sure you don’t binge 

on vending machine snacks when you get midday hunger pangs? 

Keep nuts and healthy snacks in your desk drawer. The easiest thing 

to grab when you’re hungry is empty carbs. One strategy I use is to 

have protein on hand. I cook up a bunch of chicken on Sunday, and 

package it and have it ready for the week. 
One of my most distracting and destructive habits is my e-mail 
addiction. Seriously, this is no laughing matter. I can lose hours of 

 ooding my 

inbox if I’m not vigilant about staying organized and focused. 

To set up the discipline of my new habit of only checking e-mail 

three times a day, I turned off all alarms, all automatic-receive 

functions, and shut the program down when I’m not in one of 

those three windows of allocated time. I have to build the walls 

around that time vortex, lest I keep falling in all day. 
2. Think Addition, Not Subtraction 
When I interviewed Montel Williams for 
SUCCESS, he told 
me about the strict diet he maintains because of the disease that 

af icts him, multiple sclerosis. Montel has adopted something 

called “The Add-in Principle,” and I think it’s a wildly effective 

tool for anyone with any goal. 
“It’s not so much what you attempt to take out of your diet,” he 
explained to me. “It’s what you put in instead.” This has become his 
analogy for life. Instead of thinking that he has to deprive himself, 

or take something out of his diet (e.g., “I can’t eat a hamburger, 

chocolate, or dairy”), he thinks about what he can have instead 
(e.g., “Today I’m going to have a salad and steamed vegetables and 

fr  lls his focus and his belly with what he can have, 
Chapter_3.indd   85

Chapter_3.indd   854/21/10   1:01:35 PM

4/21/10   1:01:35 PM86THE COMPOUND EFFECTso he no longer has attention or hunger for what he can’t. Instead 

 ce, Montel thinks about what 

he gets to “add in.” The result is a lot more powerful. 
A friend of mine wanted to break his bad habit of wasting too 
much time watching TV. To help out, I asked him what he’d like 

to do with three hours of free time if he had it. He said he would 

play with his kids more. I also asked him to pick a hobby he’d 

always wanted to explore. His choice was photography. A total 

techie, he went out and got all this high-tech editing equipment, 
which he happily toted along on more family outings so he 

could take great photos of his kids. Then he’d spend hours in 

the evening editing and putting together slide shows and photo 
albums for the whole family to enjoy. They ended up spending 

time together, laughing and remembering how much fun they’d 

had. Because he was so focused on his kids and photography, he 

no longer had the time nor the desire to sit around and watch TV 

at night. He realized he’d been zoning out on it because it was an 

easy mental escape from his workday. By replacing TV viewing 

with his new habit of playing games with his kids and working 
on his photography hobby he discovered passions with far more 

power and far bigger payoffs. 
What can you choose to “add in” so you can enrich your 
life experience? 
3. Go for a PDA: Public Display of Accountability 
Picture any public of cial taking the oath of of ce. “I do 
solemnly swear…” and then comes the speech on how she’ll 
turn her campaign promises into boots-on-the-ground realities. 

Once she puts it out there on the public record, she knows that 
Chapter_3.indd   86

Chapter_3.indd   864/21/10   1:01:38 PM

4/21/10   1:01:38 PM87HABITSshe’ll be held responsible for any action that rolls back on her 

promises and praised for any progress toward her goals. 
Want to cement that new habit? Get Big Brother to watch 
you. It’s never been easier with all the social media available. 

I heard about one woman who decided to get control of her 

 nances by blogging about every penny she spends every 

day. She’s got her family, friends, and plenty of colleagues 

following her spending habits, and as a result of the many eyes 

of scrutiny, she’s become far more responsible and disciplined 

 nances. 
I once helped a co-worker quit smoking by telling everyone 
at the company: “Listen up! Zelda’s decided to stop smoking! 

Isn’t that great? She just smoked her last cigarette!” I then 

placed a huge wall calendar on the outside of her cubical. Every 

day she didn’t smoke, Zelda got to draw a big fat red X on 

the calendar. Co-workers took notice and started to cheer her 

on, and the parade of big r ll up the chart, 

which took on a life of its own. Zelda didn’t want to quit on 

that chart, quit on her co-workers, or quit on herself. But she 

did quit smoking! 
Tell your family. Tell your friends. Tell Facebook and Twitter. 
Get the word out that there’s a new sheriff in town, and you’re 

in charge. 
4. Find a Success Buddy 
There are few things as powerful as two people locked arm 
and arm marching toward the same goal. To up your chances 

of success, get a success buddy, someone who’ll keep you 

accountable as you cement your new habit while you return 
Chapter_3.indd   87

Chapter_3.indd   874/21/10   1:01:41 PM

4/21/10   1:01:41 PM88THE COMPOUND EFFECTthe favor. I, for example, have what I call a “Peak-Performance 

Partner.” Every Friday at 11 a.m. sharp, we have a thirty-minute 

 xes, ah-has, and 

solicit the needed feedback and hold each other accountable. 
You might seek out a success buddy for regular walks, runs, 

or dates at the gym, or to meet to discuss and trade personal-
development books. 5. Competition & Camaraderie 
There’s nothing like a friendly contest to whet your 
competitive spirit and immerse yourself in a new habit with 

a bang. Dr. Mehmet Oz once told me in an interview, “If 

people would just walk a thousand more steps per day, they 

would change their lives”. VideoPlus, the parent company for 

SUCCESS, held a step competition using shoe pedometers to 

count steps. Employees organized into teams and competed 

to see which team could accumulate the most steps. It was 

amazing to me that people who didn’t previously exercise for 

 t suddenly started walking four ve, 
or six miles a day! At lunch, they walked in the parking lot. 

If they knew they had a conference call, suddenly they were 

out doing it on their cell phones while they walked! Because 

of the competition, they found ways to increase their activity. 

Everyone’s steps were tracked, and the whole of ce could see 

who was slacking off and who was stepping up. People’s step 

tallies increased every day. 
Yet as soon as the competition was over, I was fascinated to 
observe that the step count completely dropped off the cliff—by 

more than 60 percent just one month after the competition. When 
Chapter_3.indd   88

Chapter_3.indd   884/21/10   1:01:44 PM

4/21/10   1:01:44 PM89HABITSthe competition was reorganized again, the step count shot right 

back up. All it took was a little competition to keep people’s 

engines revved—and they got a wonderful sense of community 

and shared experience and camaraderie in the bargain. 
What kind of friendly competition can you organize with 
your friends, colleagues, or teammates? How can you inject fun 
rivalry and a competitive spirit into your new habit? 6. Celebrate! 
All work and no play make Jack a dull boy, and it’s a recipe for 
backsliding. There should be a time to celebrate, to enjoy some of 

the fruits of your victories along the way. You can’t go through this 

  t. Y nd little 

rewards to give yourself every month, every week, every day—even 

something small to acknowledge that you’ve held yourself to a new 

behavior. Maybe time to yourself to take a walk, relax in the bath, or 

read something just for fun. For bigger milestones, book a massage 

or have dinner at your favorite restaurant. And promise yourself a 

nice big pot of gold when you reach the end of the rainbow. 
Change Is Hard: Yippee! 
There is a one thing that 99 percent of “failures” and “successful” 
folks have in common—they all hate doing the same things. The 
difference is successful people do them anyway. Change is hard. 

That’s why people don’t transform their bad habits, and why so 
many people end up unhappy and unhealthy. 
What excites me about this reality, however, is that if change 
were easy, and everyone were doing it, it would be much more 
Chapter_3.indd   89

Chapter_3.indd   894/21/10   1:01:47 PM

4/21/10   1:01:47 PM90THE COMPOUND EFFECTdif cult for you and me to stand out and become an extraordinary 

success. Ordinary is easy. 
Extra-ordinary is what will separate you 
from the crowd. 
Personally, I’m always happy when something is hard. 
Why? Because I know that most people won’t do what it 

takes; therefore, it will be easier for me to step in front of the 

pack and take the lead. I love what Dr. Martin Luther King 

Jr. said so eloquently: “The ultimate measure of a man is not 

where he stands in moments of comfort and convenience, 

but where he stands at times of challenge.” When you press 

on despite dif culty, tedium, and hardship, that’s when you 

earn your improvement and gain strides on the competition. 

If it’s hard, awkward, or tedious, so be it. Just do it. And keep 

doing it, and the magic of the Compound Effect will reward 

you handsomely. 
Be Patient 
When it comes to breaking old bad habits and starting new 
ones, remember to be patient with yourself. If you’ve spent twenty, 

thirty, or forty years or more repeating the behaviors you’re now 

trying to change, you’ve got to expect it’s going to take time and 

effort before you see lasting results. Science shows that patterns of 

thoughts and actions repeated many times create what’s called a 

neuro-signature or a “brain groove,” or a series of interconnected 

neurons that carry the thought patterns of a particular habit. 

Attention feeds the habit. When we give our attention to a habit, 

we activate the brain groove, releasing the thoughts, desires, and 

actions related to that habit. Luckily, our brains are malleable. If 
Chapter_3.indd   90

Chapter_3.indd   904/21/10   1:01:49 PM

4/21/10   1:01:49 PM91HABITSwe stop giving attention to the bad habits, those grooves weaken. 

When we form new habits, we drive new grooves deeper with 

each repetition, eventually overpowering the previous ones. 
Creating new habits (and burning new grooves into your 
brain) will take time. Be patient with yourself. If you fall off the 

wagon, brush yourself off (not beat yourself up!), and get back 

on. No problem. We all stumble. Just go again and try another 

strategy; reinforce your commitment and consistency. When you 

press on, you will receive huge payoffs. Speaking of payoffs, the 

next chapter is where we really start breaking away from the 

herd, where the multiplying effect really takes shape. With all the 

disciplined effort you’ve applied from the fundamentals of the 

 rst three chapters, here’s where you get rewarded—big time! 
Chapter_3.indd   91

Chapter_3.indd   914/21/10   1:01:54 PM

4/21/10   1:01:54 PM