CHAPTER 3 HABITS
A wise teacher was taking a stroll through the forest with ayoung pupil and stopped before a tiny tree.“Pull up that sapling,” the teacher instructed his pupil, pointingto a sprout just coming up from the earth. The youngster pulledngers. “Now pull up that one,” said theteacher, indicating a more established sapling that had grownto about knee high to the boy. With little effort, the lad yankedand the tree came up, roots and all. “And now, this one,” saidthe teacher, nodding toward a more well-developed evergreenthat was as tall as the young pupil. With great effort, throwingall his weight and strength into the task, using sticks and stonehe found to pry up the stubborn r nally got thetree loose.“Now,” the wise one said, “I’d like you to pull this one up.”The young boy followed the teacher’s gaze, which fell upon aChapter_3.indd   55Chapter_3.indd   554/21/10   1:00:14 PM
the great struggle he’d just had pulling up the much smaller tree,he simply told his teacher, “I am sorry, but I can’t.”“My son, you have just demonstrated the power that habits will have over your life!” the teacher exclaimed. “The olderthey are, the bigger they get, the deeper the roots grow, and theharder they are to uproot. Some get so big, with roots so deep,you might hesitate to even try.”Creatures of Habit Aristotle wrote, “We are what we repeatedly do.” Merriam-W nes habit this way: “An acquired mode of behaviorthat has become nearly or completely involuntary.”There’s a story about a man riding a horse, galloping quickly.It appears that he’s going somewhere very important. A manstanding along the roadside shouts, “Where are you going?”The rider replies, “I don’t know. Ask the horse!” This is the storyof most people’s lives; they’re riding the horse of their habits,with no idea where they’re headed. It’s time to take control ofthe reins, and move your life in the direction of where you reallywant to go. If you’ve been living on autopilot and allowing your habits to run you, I want you to understand why. And I want you tolet yourself off the hook. After all, you’re in good company.Psychological studies reveal that 95 percent of everything wefeel, think, do, and achieve is a result of a learned habit! We’reborn with instincts, of course, but no habits at all. We developthem over time. Beginning in childhood, we learned a series of Chapter_3.indd   56Chapter_3.indd   564/21/10   1:00:17 PM4/21/10   1:00:17 PM57HABITSconditioned responses that led us to react automatically (as in,without thinking) to most situations.  nitepositives. If you had to consciously think about every step ofeach ordinary task—making breakfast, driving the kids to school,getting to work, and so on—your life would grind to a halt. Youprobably brush your teeth twice a day on autopilot. There’sno big philosophical debate; you just do it. You strap on yourseatbelt the minute your butt hits the seat. No second thoughts.Our habits and routines allow us to use minimal consciousenergy for everyday tasks. They help keep us sane and enableus to handle most situations reasonably well. And because wedon’t have to think about the mundane, we can focus our mentalenergy on more creative and enriching thoughts. Habits can behelpful—as long as they’re good habits, that is.If you eat healthfully, you’ve likely built healthy habits aroundthe food you buy and what you order at restaurants. If you’r t,it’s probably because you work out regularly. If you’re successfulin a sales job, it’s probably because your habits of mentalpreparation and positive self-talk enable you to stay optimisticin the face of rejection.I’ve met and worked with many great achievers, CEOs, and“superstars,” and I can tell you they all share one commontrait—they all have good habits. That’s not to say they don’thave bad habits; they do. But not many. A daily routine built ongood habits is the difference that separates the most successfulamongst us from everyone else. And doesn’t that make sense?From what we’ve already discussed, you know successful peoplearen’t necessarily more intelligent or more talented than anyoneChapter_3.indd   57Chapter_3.indd   574/21/10   1:00:19 PM
informed, more knowledgeable, more competent, better skilled,and better prepared.My dad used Larry Bird as an example to teach me abouthabits when I was a kid. “Larry Legend” is known as one of thegreatest professional basketball players. But he wasn’t knownfor being the most athletically talented player. Nobody wouldhave described Larry as “graceful” on the basketball court. Yet,despite his limited natural athletic ability, he led the BostonCeltics to three world championships and remains one of thebest players of all time. How did he do it? It was Larry’s habits—his relentless dedication to practice and toimprove his game. Bird was one of the most consistent free-throwshooters in the history of the NBA. Growing up, his habit was tove hundred free-throw shots every morning before school.With that kind of discipline, Larry made the most of his God-giventalents and kicked the butts of some of the most “gifted” players onthe court.Like Larry Bird, you can condition your automatic andunconscious responses to be those of a developed champion.This chapter is about choosing to make up for what you lack ininnate ability with discipline, hard work, and good habits. It’sabout becoming a creature of champion habits.With enough practice and repetition, any behavior, good orbad, becomes automatic over time. That means that even thoughwe developed most of our habits unconsciously (by modeling ourparents, responding to environmental or cultural associations,or creating coping mechanisms), we can consciously decide tochange them. It stands to reason that since you learned every habitChapter_3.indd   58Chapter_3.indd   584/21/10   1:00:22 PM4/21/10   1:00:22 PM59HABITSyou have, you can also unlearn the ones that aren’t serving youwell. Ready? Here goes…Start by Thinking Your Way Out ofthe Instant Gratiﬁ cation TrapW ng Pop-Tarts won’t slenderizeour waistlines. We realize that logging three hours a nightwatching Dancing with the Stars and NCIS leaves us with threefewer hours to r c audio. We“get” that merely purchasing great running shoes doesn’t makeus marathon-ready. We’re a “rational” species—at least that’swhat we tell ourselves. So why are we so irrationally enslavedby so many bad habits? It’s because our need for immediatecation can turn us into the most reactive, nonthinkinganimals around.If you took a bite of a Big Mac and immediately fell to theground clutching your chest from a heart attack, you might not goback for that second bite. If your next puff of a cigarette instantlymutated your face into that of a weather ve-year-old,chances are you’d pass on that, too. If you failed to make that tenthcall today and wer red and bankrupted, suddenlypicking up the phone would be a no-brainer.  rstfty pounds on your frame, saying“no thank you” to dessert would be the true piece of cake.The problem is that the payof cation derivedfrom bad habits often far outweighs what’s going on in yourrational mind concerning long-term consequences. Indulgingin our bad habits doesn’t seem to have any negative effects atChapter_3.indd   59Chapter_3.indd   594/21/10   1:00:25 PM
doesn’t shrivel up, you’re not standing in the unemploymentline, and your thighs aren’t thunderous. But that doesn’t meanyou haven’t activated the Compound Effect.It’s time to WAKE UP and realize that the habits youindulge in could be compounding your life into repeateddisaster. The slightest adjustments to your daily routinescan dramatically alter the outcomes in your life. Again, I’mnot talking about quantum leaps of change or a completeoverhaul of your personality, character, and life. Supersmall,seemingly inconsequential adjustments can and willrevolutionize everything.The best illustration I can give you to emphasize the power of small adjustments is that of a plane traveling from Los Angeles toNew York City. If the nose of the plane is pointed only 1 percentoff course—almost an invisible adjustment when the plane’ssitting on the tarmac in Los Angeles—it will ultimately end upabout 150 miles off course, arriving either upstate in Albany orin Dover, Delaware. Such is the case for your habits. A singlepoor habit, which doesn’t look like much in the moment, canultimately lead you miles off course from the direction of yourgoals and the life you desire. See Figure 6.Most people drift through life without devoting muchconscious ener  cally what they want andwhat they need to do to take themselves there. I want to show youhow to ignite your passion and help you aim your unstoppablecreative power in the direction of your heart’s dreams and desires.Uprooting bad habits that have grown into mighty oaks is goingto be arduous and dif cult; to see the process through will requireChapter_3.indd   60Chapter_3.indd   604/21/10   1:00:27 PM4/21/10   1:00:27 PM61HABITSFig. 6New York CityDelawareAlbanyLos Angelessomething greater than even the most relentless determination—willpower alone won’t cut it.Finding Your Mojo—Your Why-PowerAssuming willpower is what you need to change your habits is akin to trying to keep a hungry grizzly bear out of your picnicbasket by covering the it with a napkin. T ght the bear of yourbad habits, you need something stronger.The power of small adjustments: a 1 percent change in course resultsin being 150 miles off course.Chapter_3.indd   61Chapter_3.indd   614/22/10   4:08:48 PMyour goals, it’s common to believe you simply lack willpower. 
I disagree. It’s not enough to choose to be successful. What’sgoing to keep you consistent with the new positive choices youneed to make? What’s going to stop you from falling back intoyour mindless bad habits? What’s going to be different thistime versus the times you’ve tried and failed before? As soonas you get the slightest bit uncomfortable, you’re going to betempted to slide back into your old, comfortable routine.You’ve tried willpower before and it’s failed you. You’veset resolutions and you’ve let them go. You thought you weregoing to lose all that weight last time. You thought you’dmake all those sales calls last year. Let’s “stop the insanity”and do something different so you can get different andbetter results.Forget about willpower. It’s time forwhy-power. Yourchoices are only meaningful when you connect them to yourdesires and dreams. The wisest and most motivating choicesare the ones aligned with that which you identify as yourpurpose, your core self, and your highest values. You’ve gotto want something, and know why you want it, or you’ll endup giving up too easily.So, what is your why? You’ve got to have a reason if you wantcant improvements to your life. And to make youwant to make the necessary changes, your why must be something that is fantastically motivating—to you. You’ve got to want to getup and go, go, go, go, go—for years! So, what is it that moves youthe most? Identifying your why is critical. What motivates you is the ignition to your passion, the source for your enthusiasm, andChapter_3.indd   62Chapter_3.indd   624/21/10   1:00:33 PM4/21/10   1:00:33 PM63HABITSthe fuel of your persistence. This is so important that I made itrst book,Design Your Best Year Ever: A ProvenFormula for Achieving BIG GOALS (SUCCESS Books, 2009). YouMUST know your why. Why Everything’s PossibleThe power of your why is what gets you to stick throughthe grueling, mundane, and laborious. All of thehows will bemeaningless until your whys are powerful enough. Until you’veset your desire and motivation in place, you’ll abandon anynew path you seek to better your life. If your why-power—yourdesire—isn’t great enough, if the fortitude of your commitmentisn’t powerful enough, you’ll end up like every other personwho makes a New Year’s resolution and gives up too quicklyand reverts to sleepwalking through poor choices. Let me giveyou an analogy to help bring it home:If I were to put a ten-inch-wide, thirty-foot-long plank on theground and say, “If you walk the length of the plank, I’ll giveyou twenty dollars,” would you do it? Of course, it’s an easytwenty bucks. But what if I took that same plank and made aroof-top “bridge” between two 100-story buildings? That sametwenty dollars for walking the thirty-foot plank no longer looksdesirable or even possible, does it? You’d look at me and say,“Not on your life.” See Figure 7.However, if your child was on the opposite building, andre, would you walk the length of theplank to save him? Without question and immediately—you’ddo it, twenty dollars or not.Chapter_3.indd   63Chapter_3.indd   634/21/10   1:00:36 PM rst time I asked you to cross that sky-
high plank, you said no way, yet, the second time you wouldn’thesitate? The risks and the dangers are the same. What changed?Yourwhy changed—your reason for wanting to do it. You see,when the reason is big enough, you will be willing to performalmost any how. To truly ignite your creative potential and inner drive, youhave to look beyond the motivation of monetary and materialgoals. It’s not that those motivations are bad; in fact, they’reIs your why-power great enough?Chapter_3.indd   64Chapter_3.indd   644/22/10   4:55:30 PM4/22/10   4:55:30 PM65HABITSgreat. I’m a connoisseur of nice things. But material stuffcan’t really recr ght.That passion has to come from a deeper place. And, even ifyou acquire the shiny object(s), you won’t capture the realllment. In my interview with peak-performance expert Anthony Robbins (SUCCESS, January2009), he said: “I have seen business moguls achieve theirultimate goals, but still live in frustration, worry, and fear.What’s preventing these successful people from being happy?The answer is they have focused only on achievement and notllment. Extraordinary accomplishment does not guaranteeextraordinary joy, happiness, love, and a sense of meaning.These two skill sets feed off each other, and makes me believellment is failure.”Well said. That’s why it’s not enough to choose to be successful.Y nd your core motivation, toactivate your superpower. Your why-power.Core MotivationThe access point to your why-power is through yourcorevalues ne both who you are and what you standfor. Your core values are your internal compass, your guidinglter through whichyou run all of life’s demands, requests, and temptations, makingsure they’re leading you toward your intended destination.Getting your cor ned and properly calibrated is oneof the most important steps in redirecting your life toward yourgrandest vision. Chapter_3.indd   65Chapter_3.indd   654/21/10   1:00:41 PM4/21/10   1:00:41 PM66THECOMPOUNDEFFECTIf you haven’t alr ned your values, you maynd yourself making choices that  ict with what you want.If, for example, honesty is a big thing for you, but you hang outwith liars, ther  ict withyour values, you’ll end up unhappy, frustrated, and despondent.In fact, psychologists tell us that nothing creates more stressthan when our actions and behaviors aren’t congruent withour values.ning your core values also helps make life simpler andmore ef cient. Decision-making is also easier when you arecertain of your core values. When faced with a choice, askyourself, “Does this align with my core values?” If it does, doit. If not, don’t, and don’t look back. All fretting and indecisionare eliminated.To identify your core values, use the Core ValuesAssessment sheet on page 167, or download atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.Find Your FightPeople are either motivated by something they want orsomething they don’t want. Love is a powerfully motivatingforce. But so is hate. Contrary to social correctness, it can begood to hate. Hate disease, hate injustice, hate ignorance, hatecomplacency, and so on. Sometimes identifying an enemyre. Some of my greatest motivation, determination,Chapter_3.indd   66Chapter_3.indd   664/21/10   1:00:44 PM4/21/10   1:00:44 PM67HABITS ght.In history, the most transformational stories and politicalrevolutions came about as a r ghting an enemy. Davidhad Goliath. America had the British. Luke had Darth Vader.Rocky had Apollo Creed. Twenty-somethings have “The Man.”Rush Limbaugh has the Liberals. Lance Armstrong has cancer.Apple has Microsoft. Microsoft has Apple. We could go on andon, but you get the point. Enemies give us a reason to stand tall with courage. Havingght challenges your skills, your character, and your resolve.It forces you to assess and exercise your talents and abilities.W ght, we can become fat and lazy; we loseour strength and purpose.Some of my mentorship clients worry that their why-power derives from less-than-noble goals. They feel guilty for wantingto prove the naysayers wrong. Or wanting to get back at theperson who said they’d never amount to anything, or beat thenally one-up a sibling who always dominatedthem. But, really, it doesn’t matter what the motivation is (aslong as it is legal and moral); you don’t have to be motivatedfor great humanitarian reasons. What matters is that you feelfully motivated. Sometimes that motivation can help you usea powerfully negative emotion or experience to create an evenmore powerful and successful end.This is certainly true of one of history’s most celebrated footballcoaches, Pete Carroll. When we featured Carroll inSUCCESS magazine in September of 2008, he explained his early motivationlike this: “When I grew up, I was a little dink. I couldn’t do muchbecause I was just too small. It took me a couple years to get in aChapter_3.indd   67Chapter_3.indd   674/21/10   1:00:46 PM
ght to prove it. Iwas frustrated because I knew I could be special.”Carr ght ultimately brought out his greatness.Our March 2010 issue ofSUCCESS magazine featured aninterview with acclaimed actor Anthony Hopkins. I was surprisedto learn that his extraordinary talent and determination blossomedfrom anger. Hopkins admitted to being a horrible student, burdenedcit hyperactivity disorder before suchdiagnoses existed. He was shackled with the label “problem child.”“I was a source of worry for my parents,” Hopkins revealed.“I had no apparent future because schooling and education wereimportant, but I didn’t seem to have the ability to grasp what wasbeing taught to me. My cousins were all brilliant; I felt resentfuland rejected by a whole society and was very depressed.”Hopkins harnessed his anger.  rst it propelled him toght to achieve success outside of academics or athletics. Hediscovered he had a glimmer of talent in acting. So, he usedhis anger toward the belittling labels he’d been given to fuelhis commitment to the craft of acting. Today, Hopkins isconsidered one of the greatest actors alive. As a result of thefame and fortune he’s acquired, Hopkins has been able to helpght to recover from substance abuse,in addition to supporting important environmental work.Though, initially,  it wasn’t grounded in a “noble” cause, hisght was clearly worthwhile.We can all make powerful choices. We can all take back controlby not blaming chance, fate, or anyone else for our outcomes.It’s within our ability to cause everything to change. Rather than Chapter_3.indd   68Chapter_3.indd   684/21/10   1:00:49 PM4/21/10   1:00:49 PM69HABITSletting past hurtful experiences sap our energy and sabotage oursuccess, we can use them to fuel positive, constructive change.Goals As I mentioned before, the Compound Effect is alwaysworking, and it will always take you somewhere. The questionis, where? You can harness this relentless force and have it carryyou to new heights. But you must know where you want to go.What goals, dreams, and destinations do you desire?When I attended the funeral of Paul J. Meyer, another mentorof mine, I was reminded of the richness and diversity of his life.He achieved, experienced, and contributed more than dozens ofpeople combined. His obituary made me reassess the quantityand size of the goals I set for myself. If Paul were here, he wouldtell us, “If you are not making the progress that you would like tomake and are capable of making, it is simply because your goalsar ned.” One of Paul’s most memorable quotesreminds us of the importance of goals: “Whatever you vividlyimagine, ardently desire, sincerely believe, and enthusiasticallyact upon... must inevitably come to pass!” The one skill most responsible for the abundance in my lifeis learning how to effectively set and achieve goals. Somethingalmost magical happens when you organize and focus yourcr ned target. I’ve seen this time andagain: the highest achievers in the world have all succeededbecause they mapped out their visions. The person who has aclear, compelling, and white-hot burning why will always defeateven the best of the best at doing the how. Chapter_3.indd   69Chapter_3.indd   694/21/10   1:00:52 PM4/21/10   1:00:52 PM70THECOMPOUNDEFFECTTo ﬁ gure out where you might need to add to or adjustyour goals, take the Life Assessment on page 168, ordownload atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.How Goal SettingActuallyWorks:The Mystery ‘Secret’ RevealedYou only see, experience, and get what you look for. If youdon’t know what to look for, you certainly won’t get it. By ourvery nature, we are goal-seeking creatures. Our brain is alwaystrying to align our outer world with what we’re seeing andexpecting in our inner world. So, when you instruct your brainto look for the things you want, you will begin to see them. Infact, the object of your desire has probably always existed aroundyou, but your mind and eyes weren’t open to “seeing” it.In reality, this is how theLaw of Attractionreally works. It isnot the mysterious, esoteric voodoo it sometimes sounds like.It’s far simpler and more practical than that.We are bombarded with billions of sensory (visual, audio,physical) bites of information each day. To keep ourselves fromgoing insane, we ignore 99.9 percent of them, only really seeing,hearing, or experiencing those upon which our mind focuses.This is why, when you “think” something, it appears that you aremiraculously drawing it into your life. In reality, you’re now justseeing what was already there. You are truly “attracting” it intoyour life. It wasn’t there before or accessible to you until yourthoughts focused and directed your mind to see it.Chapter_3.indd   70Chapter_3.indd   704/21/10   1:00:54 PM4/21/10   1:00:54 PM71HABITSMake sense? This isn’t mysterious at all; it’s, in fact, quite logical. Now, with this new perception, whatever your mind isthinking internally is what it will focus on and all of a sudden“see” within that 99.9 percent of remaining space.Here’s a well-worn example (because it’s so true!): In shoppingfor or buying a new car, you suddenly start to see that model andmake everywhere, right? It seems like there are tons of them onthe streets all of a sudden when they weren’t there yesterday. Butis that realistic? Of course not. They were there all along, but youweren’t paying attention to them. Thus, they didn’t really “exist”to you until you gave them your attention.  ne your goals, you give your brain somethingnew to look for and focus on. It’s as if you’re giving your mind anew set of eyes from which to see all the people, circumstances,conversations, resources, ideas, and creativity surrounding you.With this new perspective (an inner itinerary), your mind proceedsto match up on the outside what you want most on the inside—your goal. It’s that simple. The difference in how you experiencethe world and draw ideas, people, and opportunities into yourned your goals is profound.In one of my interviews with Brian Tracy, he put it this way:“Top people have very clear goals. They know who they areand they know what they want. They write it down and theymake plans for its accomplishment. Unsuccessful people carrytheir goals around in their head like marbles rattling around in acan, and we say a goal that is not in writing is merely a fantasy.And everybody has fantasies, but those fantasies are like bulletswith no powder in the cartridge. People go through life shootingblanks without written goals—and that’s the starting point.” Chapter_3.indd   71Chapter_3.indd   714/21/10   1:00:57 PM4/21/10   1:00:57 PM72THECOMPOUNDEFFECTI suggest that you take some timetodayto make a list of yourmost important goals. I recommend considering goals in allnances. Be waryof the high price of putting too much focus on any single aspectof your life, to the exclusion of everything else. Go for whole-life success—balance in all the aspects of life that are importantnances, health and well-being, spirituality,family and relationships, and lifestyle.To help you set speciﬁ c and meaningful goals,refer to the Goal Designing sheet on page 169, ordownload atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.Who You Have to BecomeWhen most people set out to achieve new goals, they ask, “Okay,I have my goal; now what do I need todoto get it?” It’s not a badrst question that needs to be addressedeither. The question we should be asking ourselves is: “Who do I needto become?” You probably know some people who seem to do all theright things, but still don’t produce the results they want, right? Whynot? One thing Jim Rohn taught me is: “If you want to have more,you have tobecomemore. Success is not something you pursue. Whaties.Success is something you attract by the person you become.”When I understood that philosophy, wow! It revolutionizedmy life and personal growth. When I was single and readyChapter_3.indd   72Chapter_3.indd   724/21/10   1:01:00 PM4/21/10   1:01:00 PM73HABITSnd my mate and get married, I made a long list of traitsI desir lled more thanforty pages of a journal, front and back, describing her in greatdetail—her personality, character, key attributes, attitudes, andphilosophies about life, even what kind of family she’d comefrom, including her culture and physical makeup, down to thetexture of her hair. I wrote in depth what our life would belike and what we’d do together. If I had then asked, “What doI have todond and get this girl?” I might still be on thaty chase. Instead, I looked back at the list and consideredwhether or not I embodied those same attributes myself. Did Ihave the very qualities I was expecting in her? I asked myself,“What kind of a man would a woman like this be lookingfor? Who do I need to become to be attractive to a woman ofthis substance?”lled forty more pages describing all the attributes, qualities,behaviors, attitudes, and characteristics I needed to become myself.Then I went to work on becoming and achieving those qualities.Guess what? It worked! As if she were peeled off the pages of myjournal and appeared in front of me, my wife, Georgia, is exactlywhat I described and asked for, in almost eerie detail. The keywas my getting clear on who I’d have to be to attract and keep awoman of her quality, and then doing the work to achieve that.To identify bad habits and needed new habits essentialto becoming and achieving what you want, completethe Habit Assessment sheet on page 170, or downloadatwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free.Chapter_3.indd   73Chapter_3.indd   734/21/10   1:01:03 PM4/21/10   1:01:03 PMAlright, let’s map out your process for achieving the goals 
you’ve decided upon. This is the doing process—or, in some cases,the STOP-doingprocess.What stands between you and your goal is your behavior. Do you need to stop doing anything so the Compound Effect isn’ttaking you into a downward spiral? Similarly, what do you needto start doing to change your trajectory so that it’s headed incial direction? In other words, what habits andbehaviors do you need to subtract from and add to your life?Your life comes down to this formula:YOUCHOICE  +  BEHAVIOR  +  HABIT  +  COMPOUNDED  =  GOALS(decision)         (action)      (repeated action)         (time)gure out which behaviors areblocking the path that leads to your goal, and which behaviorswill help you accomplish your goal. You may think you’ve got a handle on all your bad habits, butI’d bet good money you’re wrong. Again, that’s why tracking is soeffective. I mean, honestly, do you know how many hours of TV youreally watch every day? How many hours do you spend tuned tonews channels or keeping up with the goals and accomplishmentsof others on the sports or style networks? Do you know how manycans of soda you drink? Or how many hours you spend doingnonessential “work” on the computer (Facebook, reading onlinegossip, etc.)? As I emphasized in the previous chapter rstjob is to become aware of how you’re behaving. Where have youfallen asleep on the job and developed an unconscious bad habitthat’s leading you astray?Chapter_3.indd   74Chapter_3.indd   744/21/10   1:01:05 PM4/21/10   1:01:05 PM75HABITSNot long ago, a successful executive with whom I serve ona nonprofit board hired me to mentor him on improving hisproductivity. He was doing well, but knew he could optimize his timeand output further with some coaching. I had him track his activitiesfor a week, and I noticed something I see too often: He spent anincredible amount of time r ve minutes inthe morning reading the newspaper, another thirty minutes listeningto news on his morning commute, and an equal amount of timetuning in again on his drive back home. During his workday, he’dcheck Yahoo! News several times, spending at least twenty minutesfteen minutes of thelocal news while greeting his family. Then he’d catch up on thirtyminutes of sports news and thirty minutes of the 10 o’clock newsbefore going to bed. In total, he was spending 3.5 hours with thenews each day! This man wasn’t an economist or a commoditiestrader, or in any profession that lived or died by the latest news. Thetime he spent with the paper and news programs on radio and TVgreatly exceeded what he needed to be a knowledgeable voter andcontributing member of society, or even to enhance his own personalinterests. In fact, he was getting very little valuable informationthrough his programming choices—or, rather, hislack of choices.So why did he spend nearly four hours a day consuming it? It wasa habit.I suggested he keep his TV and radio off, cancel his newspapersubscription, and set up an RSS feeder so he could select andreceive only the news he deemed important for his business andpersonal interests. Doing so immediately cleared out 95 percentof the mind-cluttering and time-sucking noise. He could nowreview all that mattered to him in less than twenty minutes aChapter_3.indd   75Chapter_3.indd   754/21/10   1:01:08 PM
time), and that hour in the evening for productive activities:exercise, listening to instructional and inspirational material,reading, planning, preparing, and spending quality time with hisfamily. He tells me he’s never felt less stressed (constant negativenews has a tendency to make you anxious), and more inspiredand focused than he does now. One small, simple change inhabit, one giant leap forward in balance and productivity!Okay, now it’s your turn. Get out your little notebook and writeout your top three goals. Now make a list of the bad habits that mightbe sabotaging your progress in each area.Write down every one. Habits and behaviors never lie. If there’s a discrepancy betweenwhat you say and what you do, I’m going to believe what you do every time. If you tell me you want to be healthy, but you’ve gotngers, I’m believing the Doritos. If you sayself-improvement is a priority, but you spend more time with yourXbox than at the library, I’m believing the Xbox. If you say you’rea dedicated professional, but you show up late and unprepared,your behavior rats you out every time. You say your family is yourtop priority, but if they don’t appear on your busy calendar, theyaren’t, really. Look at the list of bad habits you just made. That’sthe truth about who you are. Now you get to decide whether that’sokay, or if you want to change.Next, add to that list all the habits you need to adopt that, practiced and compounded over time, will result in yougloriously achieving your goals. Making this list isn’t about wasting energy by gettingjudgmental and regretful. It’s about taking a clear-headed lookat what you want to improve. I’m not going to leave you there,Chapter_3.indd   76Chapter_3.indd   764/21/10   1:01:10 PM4/21/10   1:01:10 PM77HABITShowever. Let’s uproot those sabotaging bad habits and plantnew, positive, and healthy ones in their place.Game Changers: Five Strategiesfor Eliminating Bad Habits Your habits are learned; therefore, they can be unlearned. Ifyou want to sail your life in a new dir rstpick up the anchors of bad habits that have been weighing youdown. The key is to make your why-power so strong that itoverwhelms your ur cation. And for that,you need a new game plan. The following are my all-timefavorite game changers: 1. Identify Your TriggersLook at your list of bad habits. For each one you’ve written down, identify what triggers it. Figure out what I call “The Big4’s”—the “who,” the “what,” the “where,” and the “when”underlying each bad behavior. For example:Are you more likely to drink too much when you’re with• certain people?Is there a particular time of day when you just• have to have something sweet?What emotions tend to provoke your worst habits—stress,• fatigue, anger, nervousness, boredom?When do you experience those emotions? Who are you• with, where are you, or what are you doing?What situations prompt your bad habits to surface—• getting in your car, the time before performance reviews,Chapter_3.indd   77Chapter_3.indd   774/21/10   1:01:13 PM
Feeling physically insecure? Deadlines?Take a closer look at your routines. What do you typically• say when you wake up? When you’re on a coffee or lunchbreak? When you’ve gotten home from a long day?Again, get out your notebook or use the Bad Habit KillerWorksheet here (which you can also download for free atwww.TheCompoundEffect.com/free) and write down your triggers.This simple action alone increases your awareness exponentially. But,of course, this isn’t the whole enchilada, because as we’ve discussed,increasing your awareness of a bad habit isn’t enough to break it.2. Clean HouseGet to scrubbin’.  guratively. If youwant to stop drinking alcohol, remove every drop of it from yourhouse (and your vacation house, if you have one). Get rid of theglasses, any fancy utensils or doo-dads you use when you drink,and those decorative olives, too. If you want to stop drinking coffee,heave the coffee maker, and give that bag of gourmet grounds toa sleepy neighbor. If you’re trying to curb your spending, take anevening and cancel every catalogue or retail of ies in throughyour mailbox or your inbox, so you won’t even need to muster thediscipline to walk it from the front door to the recycle bin. If youwant to eat more healthfully, clean your cupboards of all the crap,stop buying the junk food—and stop buying into the argument thatit’s “not fair” to deny the other people in your family junk food justbecause you don’t want it in your life. Trust me; everyone in yourfamily is better off without it. Don’t bring it into the house, period.Get rid of whatever enables your bad habits.Chapter_3.indd   78Chapter_3.indd   784/21/10   1:01:16 PM4/21/10   1:01:16 PM79HABITS3. Swap ItLook again at your list of bad habits. How can you alterthem so that they’re not as harmful? Can you replace themwith healthier habits or drop-kick them altogether? As in,for good.Anyone who knows me knows that I love something sweet after a meal. If there is ice cream in the house, the somethingxings(1,255 calories). Instead, I replace that bad habit with twoHershey’s Kisses (50 calories). I’m still able to satisfy the sweettooth without having to spend the extra hour on the treadmilljust to get back to even.  My sister-in-law started a habit of eating crunchy and saltyjunk food when she watched TV. She’d crunch through a wholebag of tortilla chips with little actual awareness. Then she realizedthat what she really enjoyed was the crunchy sensation in hermouth. She decided to replace her bad habit with crunching oncarrot and celery sticks, and raw broccoli spears. She got thesame joyful sensation, and her FDA-recommended vegetableservings at the same time. A guy who used to work for me had a habit of drinking eightto ten Diet Cokes a day (that’s a BAD habit!). I suggested hereplace them with low-sodium, carbonated water, adding freshlemon, lime, or oranges. He did this for about a month beforerealizing he didn’t need the carbonation at all, and switched tojust plain water.Play with this, and see what behaviors you can replace, delete,or swap out. Chapter_3.indd   79Chapter_3.indd   794/21/10   1:01:18 PM c Ocean. Whenever I get in the water, I get 
rst, then walk in up to my knees, thenit’s my waist and chest, before taking the plunge. Some peoplejust run and dive in and get it over with—good for them. Notme. I like to ease my way in (probably residual trauma from mychildhood, as you’ll see in the next strategy). For some of yourlong-standing and deep-rooted habits, it may be more effectiveto take small steps to ease into unwinding them. You may havespent decades repeating, cementing, and fortifying those habits,so it can be wise to give yourself some time to unravel them, onestep at a time. A few years, ago my wife’s doctor required she cut out caffeinefrom her diet for several months. We bothlove our coffee, so ifshe was going to have to suffer, I decided it was only fair that wedo it together. W rst went to 50/50—50 percent decaffeinatedand 50 percent regular for a week. Then 100 percent decaf foranother week. Then Earl Grey decaf tea for a week, followed bydecaf green tea. It took us a month to get there, but we didn’tsuffer even a moment of caffeine withdrawal—no headaches, nosleepiness, no brain fog, no nothing. However, if we had gonecold turkey… well, I shiver at the thought. 5. Or Jump InNot everyone is wired the same way. Some researchers havefound that it can be paradoxically easier for people to makelifestyle changes if they change a great many bad habits at once.For example, pioneering cardiologist Dr. Dean Ornish foundhe could reverse people’s advanced heart disease—withoutChapter_3.indd   80Chapter_3.indd   804/21/10   1:01:21 PM4/21/10   1:01:21 PM81HABITSmedication or surgery—with dramatic lifestyle changes. Hediscovered they often found it easier to say goodbye to almostall their bad habits at once. He enrolled them in a trainingsession where he substituted a very low-fat diet for their fat- andcholesterol-rich fare. The program included exercise—gettingthem off their couches and walking or jogging—as well asstress-reduction techniques, and other heart-healthy habits.Amazingly, in less than a month, these patients learned to letgo of a lifetime of bad habits and embrace new ones—and theyts after a year as aresult. Personally nd this to be the exception, not the rule, butgure out the strategy that works best for you.When I was a kid, my family camped at a little-known spotcalled Lake Rollins. The lake, situated not far from the Sierrasin Northern California, is fed from glaciers that melt from atopthe mountains of Lake Tahoe. The water’s ridiculously cold.Every day we were there, my dad insisted that I water ski inthe polar pond. All day I would be quietly anxious about thedreaded call to go in. I loved to water ski; I just hated gettingin the water. A ict of interest, because of course, therewas no separating one from the other.Dad made sure that I never missed my turn, sometimesby actually physically throwing me in. After a dozen or soexcruciating seconds of near-hypothermia, I always found thewater refreshing and rejuvenating. My anticipation of gettingin the water was actually worse than the reality of just jumpingin. Once my body acclimated, water skiing was a blast. And,yet, I went through this cycle of dread and relief each andevery time.Chapter_3.indd   81Chapter_3.indd   814/21/10   1:01:24 PMchanging a bad habit. For a short while it can feel excruciating, 
or at least quite uncomfortable. But just as the body adjusts to achanging environment through a process called homeostasis, wehave a similar homeostatic ability to adjust to unfamiliar behaviorchanges. And usually, we can regulate ourselves physiologicallyand psychologically to the new circumstances quite quickly.Sometimes wading in just won’t do. Sometimes you really dohave to jump in. I want you to ask yourself now, “Where can I startslow and hold myself accountable?” And, “Where do I need to takethat bigger leap? Where have I been avoiding pain or discomfort,when I know deep down that I’ll adapt in no time if I just go for it?”One of my former partners has a brother who was a beer-guzzling, bar-brawling, life-of-the-party alcoholic. He drank atlunch, with dinner, after dinner, and all weekend long. One dayhe was at a wedding for a former college roommate when hesaw his friend’s brother, who was ten years older than both ofthem, but looked ten years younger! He watched the man dance,laugh, and play during the wedding, exuding a vitality he hadn’tfelt in many years. He made a decision on the spot that he wouldnever touch a drop of alcohol again. Cold turkey, that was it,never again. And he hasn’t in more than six years.When it comes to changing bad habits at home, I’m a toe dipper.But in my pr nd that taking the big plunge is farmore effective. Whether committing to a new business or dealingwith potential new clients, partners, or investors, toe dippingusually doesn’t cut it. Each time, I think of Lake Rollins and knowrst, but I remember that within little time, itwill be exhilarating, and well worth the temporary discomfort.Chapter_3.indd   82Chapter_3.indd   824/21/10   1:01:27 PM4/21/10   1:01:27 PM83HABITSRun a Vice Check I’m not suggesting you cut out every “bad” thing in your life. Most everything is good in moderation. But, how can youtell whether a bad habit is becoming the boss of you? I believein testing my vices. Every so often I go on a “vice fast.” I pickone vice, and check to be sure I’m still the alpha dog in ourrelationship. My vices are coffee, ice cream, wine, and movies. Ialready told you about my ice cream obsession. When it comes towine, I want to be sure I’m enjoying a glass and celebrating theday, not drowning a bad mood.About every three months, I pick one vice and abstainfor thirty days (this probably stems from my Catholic Lentupbringing). I love proving to myself that I’m still in charge.Try this yourself. Pick a vice—something you do in moderation,but you know doesn’t contribute to your highest good—andtake yourself on a thirty-day wagon r nd it seriouslydif cult to abstain for those thirty days, you may have found ahabit worth cutting out of your life.Game Changers: Seven Techniquesfor Installing Good Habits Now that we have helped you eliminate the bad habits that aretaking you in the wrong direction, we need to create new choices,nally take you in thedirection of your grandest desires. Eliminating a bad habit meansremoving something from your routine. Installing a new, moreproductive habit requires an entirely different skill set. You’replanting the tree, watering it, fertilizing it, and making sure it’sChapter_3.indd   83Chapter_3.indd   834/21/10   1:01:30 PM
my favorite techniques for putting good habits in place.Leadership expert John C. Maxwell said, “You will neverchange your life until you change something you do daily.The secret of your success is found in your daily routine.”According to research, it takes three hundred instances ofpositive reinforcement to turn a new habit into an unconsciouspractice—that’s almost a year of daily practice! Fortunately,as we talked about earlier, we know we’ve got a much betterchance of cementing a new habit into our lives after three weeksof diligent focus. That means that if we bring special attention toa new habit daily rst three weeks, we have a far betterchance of making it a lifelong practice. The truth is, you can change a habit in a second, or you canstill be trying to br rst time youtouched a hot stove, you instantly knew you’d never make that ahabit! The shock and pain was so intense that it forever changedyour awareness; you knew you’d be conscious for the rest ofyour life around hot stoves.The key is staying aware. If you really want to maintain agood habit, make sure you pay attention to it at least once a day,and you’re far more likely to succeed.1. Set Yourself Up to SucceedAny new habit has to work inside your life and lifestyle. If you joina gym that’s thirty miles away, you won’t go. If you’re a night owlbut the gym closes at 6 p.m., it won’t work for you. Your gym mustt into your schedule. If you want tolose weight and eat healthier, make sure your fridge and pantry areChapter_3.indd   84Chapter_3.indd   844/21/10   1:01:33 PM4/21/10   1:01:33 PM85HABITSstocked with healthy options. Want to make sure you don’t bingeon vending machine snacks when you get midday hunger pangs?Keep nuts and healthy snacks in your desk drawer. The easiest thingto grab when you’re hungry is empty carbs. One strategy I use is tohave protein on hand. I cook up a bunch of chicken on Sunday, andpackage it and have it ready for the week.One of my most distracting and destructive habits is my e-mailaddiction. Seriously, this is no laughing matter. I can lose hours ofooding myinbox if I’m not vigilant about staying organized and focused.To set up the discipline of my new habit of only checking e-mailthree times a day, I turned off all alarms, all automatic-receivefunctions, and shut the program down when I’m not in one ofthose three windows of allocated time. I have to build the wallsaround that time vortex, lest I keep falling in all day.2. Think Addition, Not SubtractionWhen I interviewed Montel Williams forSUCCESS, he toldme about the strict diet he maintains because of the disease thataf icts him, multiple sclerosis. Montel has adopted somethingcalled “The Add-in Principle,” and I think it’s a wildly effectivetool for anyone with any goal.“It’s not so much what you attempt to take out of your diet,” heexplained to me. “It’s what you put in instead.” This has become hisanalogy for life. Instead of thinking that he has to deprive himself,or take something out of his diet (e.g., “I can’t eat a hamburger,chocolate, or dairy”), he thinks about what he can have instead(e.g., “Today I’m going to have a salad and steamed vegetables andfr  lls his focus and his belly with what he can have,Chapter_3.indd   85Chapter_3.indd   854/21/10   1:01:35 PM
ce, Montel thinks about whathe gets to “add in.” The result is a lot more powerful.A friend of mine wanted to break his bad habit of wasting toomuch time watching TV. To help out, I asked him what he’d liketo do with three hours of free time if he had it. He said he wouldplay with his kids more. I also asked him to pick a hobby he’dalways wanted to explore. His choice was photography. A totaltechie, he went out and got all this high-tech editing equipment,which he happily toted along on more family outings so hecould take great photos of his kids. Then he’d spend hours inthe evening editing and putting together slide shows and photoalbums for the whole family to enjoy. They ended up spendingtime together, laughing and remembering how much fun they’dhad. Because he was so focused on his kids and photography, heno longer had the time nor the desire to sit around and watch TVat night. He realized he’d been zoning out on it because it was aneasy mental escape from his workday. By replacing TV viewingwith his new habit of playing games with his kids and workingon his photography hobby he discovered passions with far morepower and far bigger payoffs.What can you choose to “add in” so you can enrich yourlife experience?3. Go for a PDA: Public Display of AccountabilityPicture any public of cial taking the oath of of ce. “I dosolemnly swear…” and then comes the speech on how she’llturn her campaign promises into boots-on-the-ground realities.Once she puts it out there on the public record, she knows thatChapter_3.indd   86Chapter_3.indd   864/21/10   1:01:38 PM4/21/10   1:01:38 PM87HABITSshe’ll be held responsible for any action that rolls back on herpromises and praised for any progress toward her goals.Want to cement that new habit? Get Big Brother to watchyou. It’s never been easier with all the social media available.I heard about one woman who decided to get control of hernances by blogging about every penny she spends everyday. She’s got her family, friends, and plenty of colleaguesfollowing her spending habits, and as a result of the many eyesof scrutiny, she’s become far more responsible and disciplinednances.I once helped a co-worker quit smoking by telling everyoneat the company: “Listen up! Zelda’s decided to stop smoking!Isn’t that great? She just smoked her last cigarette!” I thenplaced a huge wall calendar on the outside of her cubical. Everyday she didn’t smoke, Zelda got to draw a big fat red X onthe calendar. Co-workers took notice and started to cheer heron, and the parade of big r ll up the chart,which took on a life of its own. Zelda didn’t want to quit onthat chart, quit on her co-workers, or quit on herself. But shedid quit smoking!Tell your family. Tell your friends. Tell Facebook and Twitter.Get the word out that there’s a new sheriff in town, and you’rein charge.4. Find a Success BuddyThere are few things as powerful as two people locked armand arm marching toward the same goal. To up your chancesof success, get a success buddy, someone who’ll keep youaccountable as you cement your new habit while you returnChapter_3.indd   87Chapter_3.indd   874/21/10   1:01:41 PM
Partner.” Every Friday at 11 a.m. sharp, we have a thirty-minutexes, ah-has, andsolicit the needed feedback and hold each other accountable.You might seek out a success buddy for regular walks, runs,or dates at the gym, or to meet to discuss and trade personal-development books. 5. Competition & CamaraderieThere’s nothing like a friendly contest to whet yourcompetitive spirit and immerse yourself in a new habit witha bang. Dr. Mehmet Oz once told me in an interview, “Ifpeople would just walk a thousand more steps per day, theywould change their lives”. VideoPlus, the parent company forSUCCESS, held a step competition using shoe pedometers tocount steps. Employees organized into teams and competedto see which team could accumulate the most steps. It wasamazing to me that people who didn’t previously exercise fort suddenly started walking four ve,or six miles a day! At lunch, they walked in the parking lot.If they knew they had a conference call, suddenly they wereout doing it on their cell phones while they walked! Becauseof the competition, they found ways to increase their activity.Everyone’s steps were tracked, and the whole of ce could seewho was slacking off and who was stepping up. People’s steptallies increased every day.Yet as soon as the competition was over, I was fascinated toobserve that the step count completely dropped off the cliff—bymore than 60 percent just one month after the competition. WhenChapter_3.indd   88Chapter_3.indd   884/21/10   1:01:44 PM4/21/10   1:01:44 PM89HABITSthe competition was reorganized again, the step count shot rightback up. All it took was a little competition to keep people’sengines revved—and they got a wonderful sense of communityand shared experience and camaraderie in the bargain.What kind of friendly competition can you organize withyour friends, colleagues, or teammates? How can you inject funrivalry and a competitive spirit into your new habit? 6. Celebrate!All work and no play make Jack a dull boy, and it’s a recipe forbacksliding. There should be a time to celebrate, to enjoy some ofthe fruits of your victories along the way. You can’t go through thist. Y nd littlerewards to give yourself every month, every week, every day—evensomething small to acknowledge that you’ve held yourself to a newbehavior. Maybe time to yourself to take a walk, relax in the bath, orread something just for fun. For bigger milestones, book a massageor have dinner at your favorite restaurant. And promise yourself anice big pot of gold when you reach the end of the rainbow.Change Is Hard: Yippee!There is a one thing that 99 percent of “failures” and “successful”folks have in common—they all hate doing the same things. Thedifference is successful people do them anyway. Change is hard.That’s why people don’t transform their bad habits, and why somany people end up unhappy and unhealthy.What excites me about this reality, however, is that if changewere easy, and everyone were doing it, it would be much moreChapter_3.indd   89Chapter_3.indd   894/21/10   1:01:47 PM
success. Ordinary is easy.Extra-ordinary is what will separate youfrom the crowd.Personally, I’m always happy when something is hard.Why? Because I know that most people won’t do what ittakes; therefore, it will be easier for me to step in front of thepack and take the lead. I love what Dr. Martin Luther KingJr. said so eloquently: “The ultimate measure of a man is notwhere he stands in moments of comfort and convenience,but where he stands at times of challenge.” When you presson despite dif culty, tedium, and hardship, that’s when youearn your improvement and gain strides on the competition.If it’s hard, awkward, or tedious, so be it. Just do it. And keepdoing it, and the magic of the Compound Effect will rewardyou handsomely.Be PatientWhen it comes to breaking old bad habits and starting newones, remember to be patient with yourself. If you’ve spent twenty,thirty, or forty years or more repeating the behaviors you’re nowtrying to change, you’ve got to expect it’s going to take time andeffort before you see lasting results. Science shows that patterns ofthoughts and actions repeated many times create what’s called aneuro-signature or a “brain groove,” or a series of interconnectedneurons that carry the thought patterns of a particular habit.Attention feeds the habit. When we give our attention to a habit,we activate the brain groove, releasing the thoughts, desires, andactions related to that habit. Luckily, our brains are malleable. IfChapter_3.indd   90Chapter_3.indd   904/21/10   1:01:49 PM4/21/10   1:01:49 PM